ESlfifl 


THEODORE  ROOSEVELT 


AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


' 


Copyng'h.t  by  Arthur  Lre.  1-rom  a  painting  uy  f. 

PRESIDENT  THEODORE  ROOSEVELT 


THEODORE  ROOSEVELT 

AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


WITH   ILLUSTRATIONS 


NEW  YORK 
CHARLES   SCRIBNER'S   SONS 

1922 

All  rights  reserved 


COTYMCHT,  1913,  BY 
CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS 

COPYRIGHT,  1913,  BY 
THE  OUTLOOK  COMPANY 

Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


r'75'7 


MA 


PUBLISHER'S   NOTE 

In  issuing  this  new  edition  of  THEODORE  ROOSEVELT:  AN 
AUTOBIOGRAPHY  (the  first  with  the  imprint  of  the  present 
publishers)  it  has  not  been  considered  right  to  supplement 
it  by  any  additional  chapters  written  by  another  hand. 
THEODORE  ROOSEVELT  AND  His  TIME,  As  SHOWN  IN  His  OWN 
LETTERS,  which  Colonel  Roosevelt  planned  with  Joseph 
Bucklin  Bishop,  will,  when  issued  next  year,  complete 
authentically  the  record  of  his  career.  These  two  books 
together  will  constitute  the  Life  and  Letters  of  Theodore 
Roosevelt  as  designed  by  himself. 

NOVEMBEJJ,    1910. 


FOREWORD 

NATURALLY,  there  are  chapters  of  my  autobiography  which 
cannot  now  be  written. 

It  seems  to  me  that,  for  the  nation  as  for  the  individual, 
what  is  most  important  is  to  insist  on  the  vital  need  of 
combining  certain  sets  of  qualities,  which  separately  are 
common  enough,  and,  alas,  useless  enough.  Practical  ef 
ficiency  is  common>  and  lofty  idealism  not  uncommon;  it 
is  the  combination  which  is  necessary,  and  the  combination 
is  rare.  Love  of  peace  is  common  among  weak,  short 
sighted,  timid,  and  lazy  persons;  and  on  the  other  hand 
courage  is  found  among  many  men  of  evil  temper  and  bad 
character.  Neither  quality  shall  by  itself  avail.  Justice 
among  the  nations  of  mankind,  and  the  uplifting  of  hu 
manity,  can  be  brought  about  only  by  those  strong  and 
daring  men  who  with  wisdom  love  peace,  but  who  love 
righteousness  more  than  peace.  Facing  the  immense  com 
plexity  of  modern  social  and  industrial  conditions,  there 
is  need  to  use  freely  and  unhesitatingly  the  collective  power 
of  all  of  us;  and  yet  no  exercise  of  collective  power  will 
ever  avail  if  the  average  individual  does  not  keep  his  or 
her  sense  of  personal  duty,  initiative,  and  responsibility. 
There  is  need  to  develop  all  the  virtues  that  have  the  state 
for  their  sphere  of  action;  but  these  virtues  are  as  dust 
in  a  windy  street  unless  back  of  them  lie  the  strong  and 
tender  virtues  of  a  family  life  based  on  the  love  of  the 
one  man  for  the  one  woman  and  on  their  joyous  and  fear 
less  acceptance  of  their  common  obligation  to  the  children 
that  are  theirs.  There  must  be  the  keenest  sense  of  duty, 
and  with  it  must  go  the  joy  of  living;  there  must  be  shame 
at  the  thought  of  shirking  the  hard  work  of  the  world,  and 
at  the  same  time  delight  in  the  many-sided  beauty  of  life. 
With  soul  of  flame  and  temper  of  steel  we  must  act  as  our 

vii 


viii  FOREWORD 

coolest  judgment  bids  us.  We  must  exercise  the  largest 
charity  toward  the  wrong-doer  that  is  compatible  with 
relentless  war  against  the  wrong-doing.  We  must  be  just 
to  others,  generous  to  others,  and  yet  we  must  realize  that 
it  is  a  shameful  and  a  wicked  thing  not  to  withstand  op 
pression  with  high  heart  and  ready  hand.  With  gentle 
ness  and  tenderness  there  must  go  dauntless  bravery  and 
grim  acceptance  of  labor  and  hardship  and  peril.  All  for 
each,  and  each  for  all,  is  a  good  motto ;  but  only  on  condi 
tion  that  each  works  with  might  and  main  to  so  maintain 
himself  as  not  to  be  a  burden  to  others. 

We  of  the  great  modern  democracies  must  strive  un 
ceasingly  to  make  our  several  countries'  lands  in  which  a 
poor  man  who  works  hard  can  live  comfortably  and  hon 
estly,  and  in  which  a  rich  man  cannot  live  dishonestly  nor 
in  slothful  avoidance  of  duty;  and  yet  we  must  judge  rich 
man  and  poor  man  alike  by  a  standard  which  rests  on 
conduct  and  not  on  caste,  and  we  must  frown  with  the 
same  stern  severity  on  the  mean  and  vicious  envy  which 
hates  and  would  plunder  a  man  because  he  is  well  off  and 
on  the  brutal  and  selfish  arrogance  which  looks  down  on 
and  exploits  the  man  with  whom  life  has  gone  hard. 

THEODORE  EOOSEVELT. 
SAGAMORE  HILL,  October  1,  1913. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  FAGB 

I.  BOYHOOD  AND  YOUTH 1 

II.  THE  VIGOR  OF  LIFE       ....     .     .....    27 

III.  PRACTICAL  POLITICS .     54 

IV.  IN  COWBOY  LAND     ...........     93 

V.  APPLIED  IDEALISM 129 

VI.  THE  NEW  YORK  POLICE 168 

VII.  THE  WAR  OF  AMERICA  THE  UNREADY     .     .     .     .      .  204 
VIII.  THE  NEW  YORK   GOVERNORSHIP    .......  269 

IX.  OUTDOORS  AND   INDOORS 318 

X.  THE  PRESIDENCY;  MAKING  AN  OLD  PARTY  PROGRESSIVE  349 

XI.  THE  NATURAL  EESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   ....  393 

XII.  THE  BIG  STICK  AND  THE  SQUARE  DEAL     ...     .  423 

XIII.  SOCIAL  AND  INDUSTRIAL  JUSTICB 461 

XIV.  THE  MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  THE  PANAMA  CANAL  .     .  902 
XV.  THE  PEACE  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS 532 

INDEX  .  585 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

President  Theodore  Roosevelt.    From  a  Painting  by  P.  Laszlo 

Frontispiece 

PAGE 

President  Theodore  Roosevelt  returning  from  the  Bear  Hunt, 

Newcastle,  Colorado,  in  1905   98 

Mr.  Roosevelt  at  his  Desk  when  Assistant  Secretary  of  the 

Navy 208 

The  Colonel  of  the  Rough  Riders   218 

Theodore  Roosevelt,  Governor  of  New  York  State 272 

Theodore  Roosevelt  in  Winter  Riding  Costume.    From  a  Por 
trait  by  Gari  Melchers 320 

President  Roosevelt.     From  a  Painting  by  John  S.  Sargent, 

painted  in  the  White  House 352 

Peace  Commission  at  Portsmouth  .  .  540 


THEODORE  ROOSEVELT 

AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

CHAPTER   I 

BOYHOOD  AND  YOUTH 

MY  grandfather  on  my  father's  side  was  of  almost  purely 
Dutch  blood.  When  he  was  young  he  still  spoke  some 
Dutch,  and  Dutch  was  last  used  in  the  services  of  the  Dutch 
Reformed  Church  in  New  York  while  he  was  a  small  boy. 

About  1644  his  ancestor  Klaes  Martensen  van  Roosevelt 
came  to  New  Amsterdam  as  a  "settler" — the  euphemistic 
name  for  an  immigrant  who  came  over  in  the  steerage  of  a 
sailing  ship  in  the  seventeenth  century  instead  of  the  steer 
age  of  a  steamer  in  the  nineteenth  century.  From  that 
time  for  the  next  seven  generations  from  father  to  son  every 
one  of  us  was  born  on  Manhattan  Island. 

My  father's  paternal  ancestors  were  of  Holland  stock; 
except  that  there  was  one  named  Waldron,  a  wheelwright, 
who  was  one  of  the  Pilgrims  who  remained  in  Holland  when 
the  others  came  over  to  found  Massachusetts,  and  who 
then  accompanied  the  Dutch  adventurers  to  New  Amster 
dam.  My  father 's  mother  was  a  Pennsylvanian.  Her  fore 
bears  had  come  to  Pennsylvania  with  William  Penn,  some 
in  the  same  ship  with  him;  they  were  of  the  usual  type  of 
the  immigration  of  that  particular  place  and  time.  They 
included  Welsh  and  English  Quakers,  an  Irishman, — with 
a  Celtic  name,  and  apparently  not  a  Quaker, — and  peace- 
loving  Germans,  who  were  among  the  founders  of  German- 
town,  having  been  driven  from  their  Rhineland  homes  when 
the  armies  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth  ravaged  the  Palatinate ; 
and,  in  addition,  representatives  of  a  by-no-means  alto- 

1 


2      THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

gether  peaceful  people,  the  Scotch  Irish,  who  came  to  Penn 
sylvania  a  little  later,  early  in  the  eighteenth  century.  My 
grandmother  was  a  woman  of  singular  sweetness  and 
strength,  the  keystone  of  the  arch  in  her  relations  with  her 
husband  and  sons.  Although  she  was  not  herself  Dutch,  it 
was  she  who  taught  me  the  only  Dutch  I  ever  knew,  a  baby 
song  of  which  the  first  line  ran,  "Trippe  troppa  tronjes." 
I  always  remembered  this,  and  when  I  was  in  East  Africa 
it  proved  a  bond  of  union  between  me  and  the  Boer  settlers, 
not  a  few  of  whom  knew  it,  although  at  first  they  always 
had  difficulty  in  understanding  my  pronunciation — at  which 
I  do  not  wonder.  It  was  interesting  to  meet  these  men 
whose  ancestors  had  gone  to  the  Cape  about  the  time  that 
mine  went  to  America  two  centuries  and  a  half  previously, 
and  to  find  that  the  descendants  of  the  two  streams  of  emi 
grants  still  crooned  to  their  children  some  at  least  of  the 
same  nursery  s-ongs. 

Of  my  great-grandfather  Eoosevelt  and  his  family  life  a 
century  and  over  ago  I  know  little  beyond  what  is  implied 
in  some  of  his  books  that  have  come  down  to  me — the 
Letters  of  Junius,  a  biography  of  John  Paul  Jones,  Chief 
Justice  Marshall's  "Life  of  Washington."  They  seem  to 
indicate  that  his  library  was  less  interesting  than  that  of 
my  wife's  great-grandfather  at  the  same  time,  which  cer 
tainly  included  such  volumes  as  the  original  Edinburgh 
Review,  for  we  have  them  now  on  our  own  book-shelves. 
Of  my  grandfather  Eoosevelt  my  most  vivid  childish  remi 
niscence  is  not  something  I  saw,  but  a  tale  that  was  told  me 
concerning  him.  In  his  boyhood  Sunday  was  as  dismal  a 
day  for  small  Calvinistic  children  of  Dutch  descent  as  if 
they  had  been  of  Puritan  or  Scotch  Covenanting  or  French 
Huguenot  descent — and  I  speak  as  one  proud  of  his  Hol 
land,  Huguenot,  and  Covenanting  ancestors,  and  proud  that 
the  blood  of  that  stark  Puritan  divine  Jonathan  Edwards 
flows  in  the  veins  of  his  children.  One  summer  afternoon, 
after  listening  to  an  unusually  long  Dutch  Kef ormed  sermon 
for  the  second  time  that  day,  my  grandfather,  a  small  boy, 
running  home  before  the  congregation  had  dispersed,  ran 


BOYHOOD   AND   YOUTH 


3 


into  a  party  of  pigs,  which  then  wandered  free  in  New 
York's  streets.  He  promptly  mounted  a  big  boar,  which  no 
less  promptly  bolted  and  carried  him  at  full  speed  through 
the  midst  of  the  outraged  congregation. 

By  the  way,  one  of  the  Eoosevelt  documents  which  came 
down  to  me  illustrates  the  change  that  has  come  over  cer 
tain  aspects  of  public  life  since  the  time  which  pessimists 
term  "the  earlier  and  better  days  of  the  Kepublic."  Old 
Isaac  Koosevelt  was  a  member  of  an  Auditing  Committee 
which  shortly  after  the  close  of  the  Eevolution  approved 
the  following  bill : 


The  State  of  New  York,  to  John  Cape  Dr. 

To  a  Dinner  Given  by  His  Excellency  the  Governor 
and  Council  to  their  Excellencies  the  Minnister  of 
France  and  General  Washington  &  Co. 

1783 

December 

To  120  dinners   at 48:  0:0 

To  135  Bottles  Madira     .     .     .     .     54:   0:0 

36  ditto  Port 10:16:0 

60  ditto  English  Beer   .     .     .       9:   0:0 
30  Bouls  Punch  9:   0:0 


8  dinners  for  Musick  .  , 
10  ditto  for  Sarvts  .  .  . 
60  Wine  Glasses  Broken  . 

8  Cutt  decanters  Broken 

Coffee  for  8  Gentlemen     . 

Music  fees  &ca 


1:12:0 
2:  0:0 
4:10:0 
3:  0:0 
1:12:0 
8:  0:0 
Fruit  &  Nuts 5:  0:0 


By  Cash     . 


£156:10:0 
100:16:0 

55:14:0 


WE  a  Committee  of  Council  having  examined 
the  above  account  do  certify  it   (amounting  to 
one    hundred    and    fifty-six    Pounds    ten    Shil 
lings)   to  be  just. 
December  17th  1783. 

ISAAC  ROOSEVELT 
JAS.  DUANE 
EGBT.  BENSON 
FRED.  JAY 


Received  the  above  Contents  in  full 
New  York  17th  December  1783 


JOHN  CAFE 


Think  of  the  Governor  of  New  York  now  submitting  such 
a  bill  for  such  an  entertainment  of  the  French  Ambassador 
and  the  President  of  the  United  States  I  FalstaiPs  views 


4      THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

of  the  proper  proportion  between  sack  and  bread  are  borne 
out  by  the  proportion  between  the* number  of  bowls  of 
punch  and  bottles  of  port,  Madeira,  and  beer  consumed,  and 
the  "coffee  for  eight  gentlemen " — apparently  the  only  ones 
who  lasted  through  to  that  stage  of  the  dinner.  Especially 
admirable  is  the  nonchalant  manner  in  which,  obviously  as 
a  result  of  the  drinking  of  said  bottles  of  wine  and  bowls  of 
punch,  it  is  recorded  that  eight  cut-glass  decanters  and 
sixty  wine-glasses  were  broken. 

During  the  Eevolution  some  of  my  forefathers,  North 
and  South,  served  respectably,  but  without  distinction,  in 
the  army,  and  others  rendered  similar  service  in  the  Conti 
nental  Congress  or  in  various  local  legislatures.  By  that 
time  those  who  dwelt  in  the  North  were  for  the  most  part 
merchants,  and  those  who  dwelt  in  the  South,  planters. 

My  mother's  people  were  predominantly  of  Scotch,  but 
also  of  Huguenot  and  English,  descent.  She  was  a  Geor 
gian,  her  people  having  come  to  Georgia  from  South  Caro 
lina  before  the  Revolution.  The  original  Bulloch  was  a  lad 
from  near  Glasgow,  who  came  hither  a  couple  of  centuries 
ago,  just  as  hundreds  of  thousands  of  needy,  enterprising 
Scotchmen  have  gone  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe  in 
the  intervening  two  hundred  years.  My  mother's  great 
grandfather,  Archibald  Bulloch,  was  the  first  Revolution 
ary  "President"  of  Georgia.  My  grandfather,  her  father, 
spent  the  winters  in  Savannah  and  the  summers  at  Roswell, 
in  the  Georgia  uplands  near  Atlanta,  finally  making  Roswell 
his  permanent  home.  He  used  to  travel  thither  with  his 
family  and  their  belongings  in  his  own  carriage,  followed  by 
a  baggage  wagon.  I  never  saAV  Roswell  until  I  was  Presi 
dent,  but  my  mother  told  me  so  much  about  the  place  that 
when  I  did  see  it  I  felt  as  if  I  already  knew  every  nook  and 
corner  of  it,  and  as  if  it  were  haunted  by  the  ghosts  of  all 
the  men  and  women  who  had  lived  there.  I  do  not  mean 
merely  my  own  family,  I  mean  the  slaves.  My  mother  and 
her  sister,  my  aunt,  used  to  tell  us  children  all  kinds  of 
stories  about  the  slaves.  One  of  the  most  fascinating  re 
ferred  to  a  very  old  darky  called  Bear  Bob,  because  in  the 


BOYHOOD   AND   YOUTH  5 

early  days  of  settlement  he  had  been  partially  scalped  by 
a  black  bear.  Then  there  was  Mom'  Grace,  who  was  for  a 
time  my  mother's  nurse,  and  whom  I  had  supposed  to  be 
dead,  but  who  greeted  me  when  I  did  come  to  Ro swell,  very 
respectable,  and  apparently  with  years  of  life  before  her. 
The  two  chief  personages  of  the  drama  that  used  to  be 
repeated  to  us  were  Daddy  Luke,  the  Negro  overseer,  and 
his  wife,  Mom'  Charlotte.  I  never  saw  either  Daddy  Luke 
or  Mom'  Charlotte,  but  I  inherited  the  care  of  them  when 
my  mother  died.  After  the  close  of  the  war  they  resolutely 
refused  to  be  emancipated  or  leave  the  place.  The  only 
demand  they  made  upon  us  was  enough  money  annually  to 
get  a  new  "critter,"  that  is,  a  mule.  With  a  certain  lack 
of  ingenuity  the  mule  was  reported  each  Christmas  as  hav 
ing  passed  away,  or  at  least  as  having  become  so  infirm  as 
to  necessitate  a  successor — a  solemn  fiction  which  neither 
deceived  nor  was  intended  to  deceive,  but  which  furnished 
a  gauge  for  the  size  of  the  Christmas  gift. 

My  maternal  grandfather 's  house  was  on  the  line  of  Sher 
man 's  march  to  the  sea,  and  pretty  much  everything  in  it 
that  was  portable  was  taken  by  the  boys  in  blue,  including 
most  of  the  books  in  the  library.  When  I  was  President 
the  facts  about  my  ancestry  were  published,  and  a  former 
soldier  in  Sherman's  army  sent  me  back  one  of  the  books 
with  my  grandfather's  name  in  it.  It  was  a  little  copy  of 
the  poems  of  "Mr.  Gray" — an  eighteenth-century  edition 
printed  in  Glasgow. 

On  October  27, 1858, 1  was  born  at  No.  28  East  Twentieth 
Street,  New  York  City,  in  the  house  in  which  we  lived 
during  the  time  that  my  two  sisters  and  my  brother  and  I 
were  small  children.  It  was  furnished  in  the  canonical  taste 
of  the  New  York  which  George  William  Curtis  described  in 
the  PotipJiar  Papers.  The  black  haircloth  furniture  in  the 
dining-room  scratched  the  bare  legs  of  the  children  when 
they  sat  on  it.  The  middle  room  was  a  library,  with  tables, 
chairs,  and  bookcases  of  gloomy  respectability.  It  was 
without  windows,  and  so  was  available  only  at  night.  The 
front  room,  the  parlor,  seemed  to  us  children  to  be  a  room 


6      THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

of  much  splendor,  but  was  open  for  general  use  only  on 
$unday  evening  or  on  rare  occasions  when  there  were  par 
ties.  The  Sunday  evening  family  gathering  was  the  re 
deeming  feature  in  a  day  which  otherwise  we  children  did 
not  enjoy — chiefly  because  we  were  all  of  us  made  to  wear 
clean  clothes  and  keep  neat.  The  ornaments  of  that  parlor 
I  remember  now,  including  the  gas  chandelier  decorated 
with  a  great  quantity  of  cut-glass  prisms.  These  prisms 
struck  me  as  possessing  peculiar  magnificence.  One  of 
them  fell  off  one  day,  and  I  hastily  grabbed  it  and  stowed 
it  away,  passing  several  days  of  furtive  delight  in  the  treas 
ure,  a  delight  always  alloyed  with  fear  that  I  would  be 
found  out  and  convicted  of  larceny.  There  was  a  Swiss 
wood-carving  representing  a  very  big  hunter  on  one  side 
of  an  exceedingly  small  mountain,  and  a  herd  of  chamois, 
disproportionately  small  for  the  hunter  and  large  for  the 
mountain,  just  across  the  ridge.  This  always  fascinated  us ; 
but  there  was  a  small  chamois  kid  for  which  we  felt  agonies 
lest  the  hunter  might  come  on  it  and  kill  it.  There  was  also 
a  Eussian  moujik  drawing  a  gilt  sledge  on  a  piece  of  mala 
chite.  Some  one  mentioned  in  my  hearing  that  malachite 
was  a  valuable  marble.  This  fixed  in  my  mind  that  it  was 
valuable  exactly  as  diamonds  are  valuable.  I  accepted  that 
moujik  as  a  priceless  work  of  art,  and  it  was  not  until  I  was 
well  in  middle  age  that  it  occurred  to  me  that  I  was  mis 
taken. 

Now  and  then  we  children  were  taken  round  to  our  grand 
father  's  house ;  a  big  house  for  the  New  York  of  those  days, 
on  the  corner  of  Fourteenth  Street  and  Broadway,  fronting 
Union  Square.  Inside  there  was  a  large  hall  running  up 
to  the  roof ;  there  was  a  tessellated  black  and  white  marble 
floor,  and  a  circular  staircase  round  the  sides  of  the  hall, 
from  the  top  floor  down.  We  children  much  admired  both 
the  tessellated  floor  and  the  circular  staircase.  I  think  we 
were  right  about  the  latter,  but  I  am  not  so  sure  as  to  the 
tessellated  floor. 

The  summers  we  spent  in  the  country,  now  at  one  place, 
now  at  another.  We  children,  of  course,  loved  the  country 


BOYHOOD   AND   YOUTH  7 

beyond  anything.  We  disliked  the  city.  We  were  always 
wildly  eager  to  get  to  the  country  when  spring  came,  and 
very  sad  when  in  the  late  fall  the  family  moved  back  to 
town.  In  the  country  we  of  course  had  all  kinds  of  pets — 
cats,  dogs,  rabbits,  a  coon,  aiid  a  sorrel  Shetland  pony 
named  General  Grant.  When  my  younger  sister  first  heard 
of  the  real  General  Grant,  by  the  way,  she  was  much  struck 
by  the  coincidence  that  some  one  should  have  given  him  the 
same  name  as  the  pony.  (Thirty  years  later  my  own  chil 
dren  had  tlieir  pony  Grant.)  In  the  country  we  children 
ran  barefoot  much  of  the  time,  and  the  seasons  went  by  in 
a  round  of  uninterrupted  and  enthralling  pleasures — super 
vising  the  haying  and  harvesting,  picking  apples,  hunting 
frogs  successfully  and  woodchucks  unsuccessfully,  gather 
ing  hickory-nuts  and  chestnuts  for  sale  to  patient  parents, 
building  wigwams  in  the  woods,  and  sometimes  playing 
Indians  in  too  realistic  manner  by  staining  ourselves  (and 
incidentally  our  clothes)  in  liberal  fashion  with  poke-cherry 
juice.  Thanksgiving  was  an  appreciated  festival,  but  it  in 
no  way  came  up  to  Christmas.  Christmas  was  an  occasion 
of  literally  delirious  joy.  In  the  evening  we  hung  up  our 
stockings — or  rather  the  biggest  stockings  we  could  borrow 
from  the  grown-ups — and  before  dawn  we  trooped  in  to 
open  them  while  sitting  on  father's  and  mother's  bed;  and 
the  bigger  presents  were  arranged,  those  for  each  child  on 
its  own  table,  in  the  drawing-room,  the  doors  to  which  were 
thrown  open  after  breakfast.  I  never  knew  any  one  else 
have  what  seemed  to  me  such  attractive  Christmases,  and 
in  the  next  generation  I  tried  to  reproduce  them  exactly  for 
my  own  children. 

My  father,  Theodore  Koosevelt,  was  the  best  man  I  ever 
knew.  He  combined  strength  and  courage  with  gentleness, 
tenderness,  and  great  unselfishness.  He  would  not  tolerate 
in  us  children  selfishness  or  cruelty,  idleness,  cowardice,  or 
untruthfulness.  As  we  grew  older  he  made  us  understand 
that  the  same  standard  of  clean  living  was  demanded  for 
the  boys  as  for  the  girls ;  that  what  was  wrong  in  a  woman 
could  not  be  right  in  a  man.  With  great  love  and  patience, 


8      THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

and  the  most  understanding  sympathy  and  consideration, 
he  combined  insistence  on  discipline.  He  never  physically 
punished  me  but  once,  but  he  was  the  only  man  of  whom  I 
was  ever  really  afraid.  I  do  not  mean  that  it  was  a  wrong 
fear,  for  he  was  entirely  just,  and  we  children  adored  him. 
We  used  to  wait  in  the  library  in  the  evening  until  we  could 
hear  his  key  rattling  in  the  latch  of  the  front  hall,  and  then 
rush  out  to  greet  him;  and  we  would  troop  into  his  room 
while  he  was  dressing,  to  stay  there  as  long  as  we  were  per 
mitted,  eagerly  examining  anything  which  came  out  of  his 
pockets  which  could  be  regarded  as  an  attractive  novelty. 
Every  child  has  fixed  in  his  memory  various  details  which 
strike  it  as  of  grave  importance.  The  trinkets  he  used  to 
keep  in  a  little  box  on  his  dressing-table  we  children  always 
used  to  speak  of  as  "treasures."  The  word,  and  some  of 
the  trinkets  themselves,  passed  on  to  the  next  generation. 
My  own  children,  when  small,  used  to  troop  into  my  room 
while  I  was  dressing,  and  the  gradually  accumulating 
trinkets  in  the  "ditty-box" — the  gift  of  an  enlisted  man 
in  the  navy — always  excited  rapturous  joy.  On  occasions 
of  solemn  festivity  each  child  would  receive  a  trinket  for 
his  or  her  "very  own."  My  children,  by  the  way,  enjoyed 
one  pleasure  I  do  not  remember  enjoying  myself.  When  I 
came  back  from  riding,  the  child  who  brought  the  bootjack 
would  itself  promptly  get  into  the  boots,  and  clump  up 
and  down  the  room  with  a  delightful  feeling  of  kinship  with 
Jack  of  the  seven-league  strides. 

The  punishing  incident  I  have  referred  to  happened  when 
I  was  four  years  old.  I  bit  my  elder  sister 's  arm.  I  do  not 
remember  biting  her  arm,  but  I  do  remember  running  down 
to  the  yard,  perfectly  conscious  that  I  had  committed  a 
crime.  From  the  yard  I  went  into  the  kitchen,  got  some 
dough  from  the  cook,  and  crawled  under  the  kitchen  table. 
In  a  minute  or  two  my  father  entered  from  the  yard  and 
asked  where  I  was.  The  warm-hearted  Irish  cook  had  a 
characteristic  contempt  for  "informers,"  but  although  she 
said  nothing  she  compromised  between  informing  and  her 
conscience  by  casting  a  look  under  the  table.  My  father 


BOYHOOD    AND    YOUTH  9 

immediately  dropped  on  all  fours  and  darted  for  me.  I 
feebly  heaved  the  dough  at  him,  and,  having  the  advantage 
of  him  because  I  could  stand  up  under  the  table,  got  a  fair 
start  for  the  stairs,  but  was  caught  halfway  up  them. 
The  punishment  that  ensued  fitted  the  crime,  and  I  hope — 
and  believe — that  it  did  me  good. 

I  never  knew  any  one  who  got  greater  joy  out  of  living 
than  did  my  father,  or  any  one  who  more  whole-heartedly 
performed  every  duty;  and  no  one  whom  I  have  ever  met 
approached  his  combination  of  enjoyment  of  life  and  per 
formance  of  duty.  He  and  my  mother  were  given  to  a  hos 
pitality  that  at  that  time  was  associated  more  commonly 
with  southern  than  northern  households;  and,  especially 
in  their  later  years  when  they  had  moved  up  town,  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Central  Park,  they  kept  a  charming,  open 
house. 

My  father  worked  hard  at  his  business,  for  he  died  when 
he  was  forty-six,  too  early  to  have  retired.  He  was  in 
terested  in  every  social  reform  movement,  and  he  did  an 
immense  amount  of  practical  charitable  work  himself.  He 
was  a  big,  powerful  man,  with  a  leonine  face,  and  his  heart 
filled  with  gentleness  for  those  who  needed  help  or  protec 
tion,  and  with  the  possibility  of  much  wrath  against  a  bully 
or  an  oppressor.  He  was  very  fond  of  riding  both  on  the 
road  and  across  the  country,  and  was  also  a  great  whip. 
He  usually  drove  four-in-hand,  or  else  a  spike  team,  that  is, 
a  pair  with  a  third  horse  in  the  lead.  I  do  not  suppose  that 
such  a  team  exists  now.  The  trap  that  he  drove  we  always 
called  the  high  phaeton.  The  wheels  turned  under  in  front. 
I  have  it  yet.  He  drove  long-tailed  horses,  harnessed  loose 
in  light  American  harness,  so  that  the  whole  rig  had  no  pos 
sible  resemblance  to  anything  that  would  be  seen  now.  My 
father  always  excelled  in  improving  every  spare  half -hour 
or  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  whether  for  work  or  enjoy 
ment.  Much  of  his  four-in-hand  driving  was  done  in  the 
summer  afternoons  when  he  wrould  come  out  on  the  train 
from  his  business  in  New  York.  My  mother  and  one  or 
perhaps  two  of  us  children  might  meet  him  at  the  station*. 


10    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

I  can  see  him  now  getting  out  of  the  car  in  his  linen  duster, 
jumping  into  the  wagon,  and  instantly  driving  off  at  a  rat 
tling  pace,  the  duster  sometimes  bagging  like  a  balloon. 
The  four-in-hand,  as  can  be  gathered  from  the  above  de 
scription,  did  not  in  any  way  in  his  eyes  represent  possible 
pageantry.  He  drove  it  because  he  liked  it.  He  was  always 
preaching  caution  to  his  boys,  but  in  this  respect  he  did  not 
practice  his  preaching  overmuch  himself;  and,  being  an 
excellent  whip,  he  liked  to  take  chances.  Generally  they 
came  out  all  right.  Occasionally  they  did  not ;  but  he  was 
even  better  at  getting  out  of  a  scrape  than  into  it.  Once 
when  we  were  driving  into  New  York  late  at  night  the  lead 
ers  stopped.  He  flicked  them,  and  the  next  moment  we 
could  dimly  make  out  that  they  had  jumped.  It  then  ap 
peared  that  the  street  was  closed  and  that  a  board  had  been 
placed  across  it,  resting  on  two  barrels,  but  without  a  lan 
tern.  Over  this  board  the  leaders  had  jumped,  and  there 
was  considerable  excitement  before  we  got  the  board  taken 
off  the  barrels  and  resumed  our  way.  "When  in  the  city  on 
Thanksgiving  or  Christmas,  my  father  was  very  apt  to 
drive  my  mother  and  a  couple  of  friends  up  to  the  racing 
park  to  take  lunch.  But  he  was  always  back  in  time  to  go 
to  the  dinner  at  the  Newsboys'  Lodging-House,  and  not  in 
frequently  also  to  Miss  Battery's  Night  School  for  little 
Italians.  At  a  very  early  age  we  children  were  taken  with 
him  and  were  required  to  help.  He  was  a  stanch  friend  of 
Charles  Loring  Brace,  and  was  particularly  interested  in 
the  Newsboys'  Lodging-Houses  and  in  the  night  schools  and 
in  getting  the  children  off  the  streets  and  out  on  farms  in 
the  West.  When  I  was  President,  the  Governor  of  Alaska 
under  me,  Governor  Brady,  was  one  of  these  ex-newsboys 
who  had  been  sent  from  New  York  out  West  by  Mr.  Brace 
and  my  father.  My  father  was  greatly  interested  in  the 
societies  to  prevent  cruelty  to  children  and  cruelty  to  ani 
mals.  On  Sundays  he  had  a  mission  class.  On  his  way  to 
it  he  used  to  drop  us  children  at  our  Sunday-school  in  Dr. 
Adams's  Presbyterian  Church  on  Madison  Square;  I  re 
member  hearing  my  aunt,  my  mother's  sister,  saying  that 


BOYHOOD   AND   YOUTH  11 

when  he  walked  along  with  us  children  he  always  reminded 
her  of  Greatheart  in  Bunyan.  Under  the  spur  of  his 
example  I  taught  a  mission  class  myself  for  three  years 
before  going  to  college  and  for  all  four  years  that  I  was  in 
college.  I  do  not  think  I  made  much  of  a  success  of  it.  But 
the  other  day  on  getting  out  of  a  taxi  in  New  York  the 
chauffeur  spoke  to  me  and  told  me  that  he  was  one  of  my 
old  Sunday-school  pupils.  I  remembered  him  well,  and  was 
much  pleased  to  find  that  he  was  an  ardent  Bull  Mooser ! 
My  mother,  Martha  Bulloch,  was  a  sweet,  gracious,  beau 
tiful  Southern  woman,  a  delightful  companion  and  beloved 
by  everybody.  She  was  entirely  "unreconstructed"  to 
the  day  of  her  death.  Her  mother,  my  grandmother,  one 
of  the  dearest  of  old  ladies,  lived  with  us,  and  was  dis 
tinctly  over-indulgent  to  us  children,  being  quite  unable  to 
harden  her  heart  towards  us  even  when  the  occasion  de 
manded  it.  Towards  the  close  of  the  Civil  "War,  although  a 
very  small  boy,  I  grew  to  have  a  partial  but  alert  under 
standing  of  the  fact  that  the  family  were  not  one  in  their 
views  about  that  conflict,  my  father  being  a  strong  Lincoln 
Eepublican ;  and  once,  when  I  felt  that  I  had  been  wronged 
by  maternal  discipline  during  the  day,  I  attempted  a  par 
tial  vengeance  by  praying  with  loud  fervor  for  the  suc 
cess  of  the  Union  arms,  when  we  all  came  to  say  our 
prayers  before  my  mother  in  the  evening.  She  was  not 
only  a  most  devoted  mother,  but  was  also  blessed  with  a 
strong  sense  of  humor,  and  she  was  too  much  amused  to 
punish  me;  but  I  was  warned  not  to  repeat  the  offense, 
under  penalty  of  my  father's  being  informed — he  being  the 
dispenser  of  serious  punishment.  Morning  prayers  were 
with  my  father.  We  used  to  stand  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs, 
and  when  father  came  down  we  called  out,  "I  speak  for  you 
and  the  cubby-hole  too!"  There  were  three  of  us  young 
children,  and  we  used  to  sit  with  father  on  the  sofa  while 
he  conducted  morning  prayers.  The  place  between  father 
and  the  arm  of  the  sofa  we  called  the  "cubby-hole."  The 
child  who  got  that  place  we  regarded  as  especially  favored 
both  in  comfort  and  somehow  or  other  in  rank  and  title. 


12    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

The  two  who  were  left  to  sit  on  the  much  wider  expanse 
of  sofa  on  the  other  side  of  father  were  outsiders  for  the 
time  being. 

My  aunt  Anna,  my  mother's  sister,  lived  with  us.  She 
was  as  devoted  to  us  children  as  was  my  mother  herself, 
and  we  were  equally  devoted  to  her  in  return.  She  taught 
us  our  lessons  while  we  were  little.  She  and  my  mother 
used  to  entertain  us  by  the  hour  with  tales  of  life  on  the 
Georgia  plantations;  of  hunting  fox,  deer,  and  wildcat;  of 
the  long-tailed  driving  horses,  Boone  and  Crockett,  and  of 
the  riding  horses,  one  of  which  was  named  Buena  Vista  in  a 
fit  of  patriotic  exaltation  during  the  Mexican  War ;  and  of 
the  queer  goings-on  in  the  Negro  quarters.  She  knew  all 
the  "Br'er  Babbit "  stories,  and  I  was  brought  up  on  them. 
One  of  my  uncles,  Eobert  Koosevelt,  was  much  struck  with 
them,  and  took  them  down  from  her  dictation,  publishing 
them  in  Harper's,  where  they  fell  flat.  This  was  a  good 
many  years  before  a  genius  arose  who  in  " Uncle  Kemus" 
made  the  stories  immortal. 

My  mother's  two  brothers,  James  Dunwoodie  Bulloch 
and  Irvine  Bulloch,  came  to  visit  us  shortly  after  the  close 
of  the  war.  Both  came  under  assumed  names,  as  they  were 
among  the  Confederates  who  were  at  that  time  exempted 
from  the  amnesty.  "Uncle  Jimmy"  Bulloch  was  a  dear 
old  retired  sea-captain,  utterly  unable  to  "get  on"  in  the 
worldly  sense  of  that  phrase,  as  valiant  and  simple  and 
upright  a  soul  as  ever  lived,  a  veritable  Colonel  Newcome. 
He  was  an  Admiral  in  the  Confederate  navy,  and  was  the 
builder  of  the  famous  Confederate  war  vessel  Alabama. 
My  uncle  Irvine  Bulloch  was  a  midshipman  on  the  Ala 
bama,  and  fired  the  last  gun  discharged  from  her  batteries 
in  the  fight  with  the  Kearsarge.  Both  of  these  uncles  lived 
in  Liverpool  after  the  war. 

My  uncle  Jimmy  Bulloch  was  forgiving  and  just  in  refer 
ence  to  the  Union  forces,  and  could  discuss  all  phases  of  the 
Civil  War  with  entire  fairness  and  generosity.  But  in  Eng 
lish  politics  he  promptly  became  a  Tory  of  the  most  ultra- 
conservative  school.  Lincoln  and  Grant  he  could  admire, 


BOYHOOD    AND    YOUTH  13 

but  he  would  not  listen  to  anything  in  favor  of  Mr.  Glad 
stone.  The  only  occasions  on  which  I  ever  shook  his  faith 
in  me  were  when  I  would  venture  meekly  to  suggest  that 
some  of  the  manifestly  preposterous  falsehoods  about  Mr. 
Gladstone  could  not  be  true.  My  uncle  was  one  of  the  best 
men  I  have  ever  known,  and  when  I  have  sometimes  been 
tempted  to  wonder  how  good  people  can  believe  of  me  the 
unjust  and  impossible  things  they  do  believe,  I  have  con 
soled  myself  by  thinking  of  Uncle  Jimmy  Bulloch's  per 
fectly  sincere  conviction  that  Gladstone  was  a  man  of  quite 
exceptional  and  nameless  infamy  in  both  public  and  private 
life. 

I  was  a  sickly,  delicate  boy,  suffered  much  from  asthma, 
and  frequently  had  to  be  taken  away  on  trips  to  find  a  place 
where  I  could  breathe.  One  of  my  memories  is  of  my  father 
walking  up  and  down  the  room  with  me  in  his  arms  at  night 
when  I  was  a  very  small  person,  and  of  sitting  up  in  bed 
gasping,  with  my  father  and  mother  trying  to  help  me.  I 
went  very  little  to  school.  I  never  went  to  the  public 
schools,  as  my  own  children  later  did,  both  at  the  "Cove 
school"  at  Oyster  Bay  and  at  the  "Ford  school"  in  Wash 
ington.  For  a  few  months  I  attended  Professor  McMullen's 
school  in  Twentieth  Street  near  the  house  where  I  was 
born,  but  most  of  the  time  I  had  tutors.  As  I  have  already 
said,  my  aunt  taught  me  when  I  was  small.  At  one  time 
we  had  a  French  governess,  a  loved  and  valued  "mam'- 
selle,"  in  the  household. 

When  I  was  ten  years  old  I  made  my  first  journey  to  Eu 
rope.  My  birthday  was  spent  in  Cologne,  and  in  order  to 
give  me  a  thoroughly  "party"  feeling  I  remember  that  my 
mother  put  on  full  dress  for  my  birthday  dinner.  I  do  not 
think  I  gained  anything  from  this  particular  trip  abroad. 
I  cordially  hated  it,  as  did  my  younger  brother  and  sister. 
Practically  all  the  enjoyment  we  had  was  in  exploring  any 
ruins  or  mountains  when  we  could  get  away  from  our  elders, 
and  in  playing  in  the  different  hotels.  Our  one  desire  wTas 
to  get  back  to  America,  and  we  regarded  Europe  with  the 
most  ignorant  chauvinism  and  contempt.  Four  years  later, 


14    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

however,  I  made  another  journey  to  Europe,  and  was  old 
enough  to  enjoy  it  thoroughly  and  profit  by  it. 

While  still  a  small  boy  I  began  to  take  an  interest  in 
natural  history.  I  remember  distinctly  the  first  day  that  I 
started  on  my  career  as  zoologist.  I  was  walking  up  Broad 
way,  and  as  I  passed  the  market  to  which  I  used  sometimes 
to  be  sent  before  breakfast  to  get  strawberries  I  suddenly 
saw  a  dead  seal  laid  out  on  a  slab  of  wood.  That  seal  filled 
me  with  every  possible  feeling  of  romance  and  adventure. 
I  asked  where  it  was  killed,  and  was  informed  in  the  harbor. 
I  had  already  begun  to  read  some  of  Mayne  Beid's  books 
and  other  boys'  books  of  adventure,  and  I  felt  that  this 
seal  brought  all  these  adventures  in  realistic  fashion  before 
me.  As  long  as  that  seal  remained  there  I  haunted  the 
neighborhood  of  the  market  day  after  day.  I  measured  it, 
and  I  recall  that,  not  having  a  tape  measure,  I  had  to  do  my 
best  to  get  its  girth  with  a  folding  pocket  foot-rule,  a  diffi 
cult  undertaking.  I  carefully  made  a  record  of  the  utterly 
useless  measurements,  and  at  once  began  to  write  a  natural 
history  of  my  own,  on  the  strength  of  that  seal.  This,  and 
subsequent  natural  histories,  were  written  down  in  blank 
books  in  simplified  spelling,  wholly  unpremeditated  and 
unscientific.  I  had  vague  aspirations  of  in  some  way  or 
another  owning  and  preserving  that  seal,  but  they  never  got 
beyond  the  purely  formless  stage.  I  think,  however,  I  did 
get  the  seal's  skull,  and  with  two  of  my  cousins  promptly 
started  what  we  ambitiously  called  the  "Boosevelt  Museum 
of  Natural  History."  The  collections  were  at  first  kept  in 
my  room,  until  a  rebellion  on  the  part  of  the  chambermaid 
received  the  approval  of  the  higher  authorities  of  the  house 
hold  and  the  collection  was  moved  up  to  a  kind  of  bookcase 
in  the  back  hall  upstairs.  It  was  the  ordinary  small  boy's 
collection  of  curios,  quite  incongruous  and  entirely  value 
less  except  from  the  standpoint  of  the  boy  himself.  My 
father  and  mother  encouraged  me  warmly  in  this,  as  they 
always  did  in  anything  that  could  give  me  wholesome  pleas 
ure  or  help  to  develop  me. 

The  adventure  of  the  seal  and  the  novels  of  Mayne  Eeid 


BOYHOOD    AND   YOUTH  15 

together  strengthened  my  instinctive  interest  in  natural 
history.  I  was  too  young  to  understand  much  of  Mayne 
Keid,  except  the  adventure  part  and  the  natural  history 
part — these  enthralled  me.  But  of  course  my  reading  was 
not  wholly  confined  to  natural  history.  There  was  very 
little  effort  made  to  compel  me  to  read  books,  my  father  and 
mother  having  the  good  sense  not  to  try  to  get  me  to  read 
anything  I  did  not  like,  unless  it  was  in  the  way  of  study. 
I  was  given  the  chance  to  read  books  that  they  thought  I 
ought  to  read,  but  if  I  did  not  like  them  I  was  then  given 
some  other  good  book  that  I  did  like.  There  were  certain 
books  that  were  taboo.  For  instance,  I  was  not  allowed  to 
read  dime  novels.  I  obtained  some  surreptitiously  and  did 
read  them,  but  I  do  not  think  that  the  enjoyment  compen 
sated  for  the  feeling  of  guilt.  I  was  also  forbidden  to 
read  the  only  one  of  Ouida  's  books  which  I  wished  to  read 
— " Under  Two  Flags/'  I  did  read  it,  nevertheless,  with 
greedy  and  fierce  hope  of  coming  on  something  unhealthy ; 
but  as  a  matter  of  fact  all  the  parts  that  might  have  seemed 
unhealthy  to  an  older  person  made  no  impression  on  me 
whatever.  I  simply  enjoyed  in  a  rather  confused  way  the 
general  adventures. 

I  think  there  ought  to  be  children's  books.  I  think  that 
the  child  will  like  grown-up  books  also,  and  I  do  not  believe 
a  child's  book  is  really  good  unless  grown-ups  get  something 
out  of  it.  For  instance,  there  is  a  book  I  did  not  have  when 
I  was  a  child  because  it  was  not  written.  It  is  Laura  E. 
Eichards's  "  Nursery  Khymes."  My  own  children  loved 
them  dearly,  and  their  mother  and  I  loved  them  almost 
equally;  the  delightfully  light-hearted  "Man  from  New 
Mexico  who  Lost  his  Grandmother  out  in  the  Snow,"  the 
adventures  of  "The  Owl,  the  Eel,  and  the  Warming-Pan," 
and  the  extraordinary  genealogy  of  the  kangaroo  whose 
"father  was  a  whale  with  a  feather  in  his  tail  who  lived  in 
the  Greenland  sea,"  while  "his  mother  was  a  shark  who 
kept  very  dark  in  the  Gulf  of  Caribee." 

As  a  small  boy  I  had  Our  Young  Folks,  which  I  then 
firmly  believed  to  be  the  very  best  magazine  in  the  world 


16    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

— a  belief,  I  may  add,  which  I  have  kept  to  this  day  un 
changed,  for  I  seriously  doubt  if  any  magazine  for  old  or 
young  has  ever  surpassed  it.  Both  my  wife  and  I  have 
the  bound  volumes  of  Our  Young  Folks  which  we  pre 
served  from  our  youth.  I  have  tried  to  read  again  the 
Mayne  Eeid  books  which  I  so  dearly  loved  as  a  boy,  only 
to  find,  alas!  that  it  is  impossible.  But  I  really  believe 
that  I  enjoy  going  over  Our  Young  Folks  now  nearly  as 
much  as  ever.  ' '  Cast  Away  in  the  Cold, "  "  Grandfather 's 
Struggle  for  a  Homestead, "  "  The  William  Henry  Letters ' ' 
and  a  dozen  others  like  them  were  first-class,  good  healthy 
stories,  interesting  in  the  first  place,  and  in  the  next  place 
teaching  manliness,  decency,  and  good  conduct.  At  the 
cost  of  being  deemed  effeminate,  I  will  add  that  I  greatly 
liked  the  girls'  stories — "Pussy  Willow"  and  "A  Summer 
in  Leslie  Goldthwaite ?s  Life,"  just  as  I  worshiped  "Little 
Men"  and  "Little  Women"  and  "An  Old-Fashioned  Girl." 
This  enjoyment  of  the  gentler  side  of  life  did  not  prevent 
my  reveling  in  such  tales  of  adventure  as  Ballantyne's 
stories,  or  Marryat's  "Midshipman  Easy."  I  suppose 
everybody  has  kinks  in  him,  and  even  as  a  child  there  were 
books  which  I  ought  to  have  liked  and  did  not.  For  in 
stance,  I  never  cared  at  all  for  the  first  part  of  "Eobinson 
Crusoe"  (and  although  it  is  unquestionably  the  best  part, 
I  do  not  care  for  it  now) ;  whereas  the  second  part,  contain 
ing  the  adventures  of  Eobinson  Crusoe,  with  the  wolves  in 
the  Pyrenees,  and  out  in  the  Far  East,  simply  fascinated 
me.  What  I  did  like  in  the  first  part  were  the  adventures 
before  Crusoe  finally  reached  his  island,  the  fight  with  the 
Sallee  Eover,  and  the  allusion  to  the  strange  beasts  at  night 
taking  their  improbable  bath  in  the  ocean.  Thanks  to 
being  already  an  embryo  zoologist,  I  disliked  the  "Swiss 
Family  Eobinson"  because  of  the  wholly  impossible  collec 
tion  of  animals  met  by  that  worthy  family  as  they  ambled 
inland  from  the  wreck.  Even  in  poetry  it  was  the  relation 
of  adventures  that  most  appealed  to  me  as  a  boy.  At  a 
pretty  early  age  I  began  to  read  certain  books  of  poetry, 
notably  Longfellow's  poem,  "The  Saga  of  King  Olaf," 


BOYHOOD   AND   YOUTH  17 

which  absorbed  me.  This  introduced  me  to  Scandinavian 
literature ;  and  I  have  never  lost  my  interest  in  and  affection 
for  it. 

Among  my  first  books  was  a  volume  of  a  hopelessly  un 
scientific  kind  by  Mayne  Reid,  about  mammals,  illustrated 
with  pictures  no  more  artistic  than  but  quite  as  thrilling  as 
those  in  the  typical  school  geography.  When  my  father 
found  how  deeply  interested  I  was  in  this  not  very  accurate 
volume,  he  gave  me  a  little  book  by  J.  G.  Wood,  the  English 
writer  of  popular  books  on  natural  history,  and  then  a 
larger  one  of  his  called  " Homes  Without  Hands."  Both  of 
these  were  cherished  possessions.  They  were  studied 
eagerly;  and  they  finally  descended  to  my  children.  The 
" Homes  Without  Hands,"  by  the  way,  grew  to  have  an 
added  association  in  connection  with  a  pedagogical  failure 
on  my  part.  In  accordance  with  what  I  believed  was  some 
kind  of  modern  theory  of  making  education  interesting  and 
not  letting  it  become  a  task,  I  endeavored  to  teach  my  eldest 
small  boy  one  or  two  of  his  letters  from  the  title-page.  As 
the  letter  "H"  appeared  in  the  title  an  unusual  number  of 
times,  I  selected  that  to  begin  on,  my  effort  being  to  keep 
the  small  boy  interested,  not  to  let  him  realize  that  he  was 
learning  a  lesson,  and  to  convince  him  that  he  was  merely 
having  a  good  time.  Whether  it  was  the  theory  or  my 
method  of  applying  it  that  was  defective  I  do  not  know, 
but  I  certainly  absolutely  eradicated  from  his  brain  any 
ability  to  learn  what  "H"  was;  and  long  after  he  had 
learned  all  the  other  letters  of  the  alphabet  in  the  old- 
fashioned  way,  he  proved  wholly  unable  to  remember  "H" 
under  any  circumstances. 

Quite  unknown  to  myself,  I  was,  while  a  boy,  under  a 
hopeless  disadvantage  in  studying  nature.  I  was  very 
near-sighted,  so  that  the  only  things  I  could  study  were 
those  I  ran  against  or  stumbled  over.  When  I  was  about 
thirteen  I  was  allowed  to  take  lessons  in  taxidermy  from  a 
Mr.  Bell,  a  tall,  clean-shaven,  white-haired  old  gentleman, 
as  straight  as  an  Indian,  who  had  been  a  companion  of 
Audubon's.  He  had  a  musty  little  shop,  somewhat  on  the 


18    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

order  of  Mr.  Venus 's  shop  in  "Our  Mutual  Friend, "  a  little 
shop  in  which  he  had  done  very  valuable  work  for  science. 
This  "vocational  study,"  as  I  suppose  it  would  be  called  by 
modern  educators,  spurred  and  directed  my  interest  in 
collecting  specimens  for  mounting  and  preservation.  It  was 
this  summer  that  I  got  my  first  gun,  and  it  puzzled  me  to 
find  that  my  companions  seemed  to  see  things  to  shoot  at 
which  I  could  not  see  at  all.  One  day  they  read  aloud  an 
advertisement  in  huge  letters  on  a  distant  billboard,  and  I 
then  realized  that  something  was  the  matter,  for  not  only 
was  I  unable  to  read  the  sign,  but  I  could  not  even  see  the 
letters.  I  spoke  of  this  to  my  father,  and  soon  afterwards 
got  my  first  pair  of  spectacles,  which  literally  opened  an 
entirely  new  world  to  me.  I  had  no  idea  how  beautiful  the 
world  was  until  I  got  those  spectacles.  I  had  been  a  clumsy 
and  awkward  little  boy,  and  while  much  of  my  clumsiness 
and  awkwardness  was  doubtless  due  to  general  characteris 
tics,  a  good  deal  of  it  was  due  to  the  fact  that  I  could  not 
see  and  yet  was  wholly  ignorant  that  I  was  not  seeing.  The 
recollection  of  this  experience  gives  me  a  keen  sympathy 
with  those  who  are  trying  in  our  public  schools  and  else 
where  to  remove  the  physical  causes  of  deficiency  in  chil 
dren,  who  are  often  unjustly  blamed  for  being  obstinate 
or  unambitious,  or  mentally  stupid. 

This  same  summer,  too,  I  obtained  various  new  books 
on  mammals  and  birds,  including  the  publications  of  Spen 
cer  Baird,  for  instance,  and  made  an  industrious  book-study 
of  the  subject.  I  did  not  accomplish  much  in  outdoor  study 
because  I  did  not  get  spectacles  until  late  in  the  fall,  a  short 
time  before  I  started  with  the  rest  of  the  family  for  a  second 
trip  to  Europe.  We  were  living  at  Dobbs  Ferry,  on  the 
Hudson.  My  gun  was  a  breech-loading,  pin-fire  double- 
barrel,  of  French  manufacture.  It  was  an  excellent  gun 
for  a  clumsy  and  often  absent-minded  boy.  There  was  no 
spring  to  open  it,  and  if  the  mechanism  became  rusty  it 
could  be  opened  with  a  brick  without  serious  damage. 
When  the  cartridges  stuck  they  could  be  removed  in  the 
same  fashion.  If  they  were  loaded,  however,  the  result  was 


BOYHOOD   AND   YOUTH  19 

not  always  happy,  and  I  tattooed  myself  with  partially  mi- 
burned  grains  of  powder  more  than  once. 

When  I  was  fourteen  years  old,  in  the  winter  of  '72  and 
'73,  I  visited  Europe  for  the  second  time,  and  this  trip 
formed  a  really  useful  part  of  my  education.  We  went  to 
Egypt,  journeyed  up  the  Nile,  traveled  through  the  Holy 
Land  and  part  of  Syria,  visited  Greece  and  Constantinople ; 
and  then  we  children  spent  the  summer  in  a  German  family 
in  Dresden.  My  first  real  collecting  as  a  student  of  natural 
history  was  done  in  Egypt  during  this  journey.  By  this 
time  I  had  a  good  working  knowledge  of  American  bird  life 
from  the  superficially  scientific  standpoint.  I  had  no  knowl 
edge  of  the  ornithology  of  Egypt,  but  I  picked  up  in  Cairo 
a  book  by  an  English  clergyman,  whose  name  I  have  now 
forgotten,  who  described  a  trip  up  the  Nile,  and  in  an 
appendix  to  his  volume  gave  an  account  of  his  bird  collec 
tion.  I  wish  I  could  remember  the  name  of  the  author  now, 
for  I  owe  that  book  very  much.  Without  it  I  should  have 
been  collecting  entirely  in  the  dark,  whereas  with  its  aid 
I  could  generally  find  out  what  the  birds  were.  My  first 
knowledge  of  Latin  was  obtained  by  learning  the  scientific 
names  of  the  birds  and  mammals  which  I  collected  and 
classified  by  the  aid  of  such  books  as  this  one. 

The  birds  I  obtained  up  the  Nile  and  in  Palestine  repre 
sented  merely  the  usual  boy's  collection.  Some  years  after 
wards  I  gave  them,  together  with  the  other  ornithological 
specimens  I  had  gathered,  to  the  Smithsonian  Institution  in 
Washington,  and  I  think  some  of  them  also  to  the  American 
Museum  of  Natural  History  in  New  York.  I  am  told  that 
the  skins  are  to  be  found  yet  in  both  places  and  in  other 
public  collections.  I  doubt  whether  they  have  my  original 
labels  on  them.  With  great  pride  the  directors  of  the 
"Roosevelt  Museum,"  consisting  of  myself  and  the  two 
cousins  aforesaid,  had  printed  a  set  of  Roosevelt  Museum 
labels  in  pink  ink  preliminary  to  what  was  regarded  as  my 
adventurous  trip  to  Egypt.  This  bird-collecting  gave  what 
was  really  the  chief  zest  to  my  Nile  journey.  I  was  old 
enough  and  had  read  enough  to  enjoy  the  temples  and  the 


20    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

desert  scenery  and  the  general  feeling  of  romance ;  but  this 
in  time  would  have  palled  if  I  had  not  also  had  the  serious 
work  of  collecting  and  preparing  my  specimens.  Doubtless 
the  family  had  their  moments  of  suffering — especially  on 
one  occasion  when  a  well-meaning  maid  extracted  from  my 
taxidermist's  outfit  the  old  tooth-brush  with  which  I  put 
on  the  skins  the  arsenical  soap  necessary  for  their  preser 
vation,  partially  washed  it,  and  left  it  with  the  rest  of  my 
wash  kit  for  my  own  personal  use.  I  suppose  that  all  grow 
ing  boys  tend  to  be  grubby;  but  the  ornithological  small 
boy,  or  indeed  the  boy  with  the  taste  for  natural  history 
of  any  kind,  is  generally  the  very  grubbiest  of  all.  An 
added  element  in  my  case  was  the  fact  that  while  in  Egypt 
I  suddenly  started  to  grow.  As  there  were  no  tailors  up 
the  Nile,  when  I  got  back  to  Cairo  I  needed  a  new  outfit. 
But  there  was  one  suit  of  clothes  too  good  to  throw  away, 
which  we  kept  for  a  "  change, "  and  which  was  known  as 
my  "Smike  suit,"  because  it  left  my  wrists  and  ankles  as 
bare  as  those  of  poor  Smike  himself. 

When  we  reached  Dresden  we  younger  children  were  left 
to  spend  the  summer  in  the  house  of  Herr  Minckwitz,  a 
member  of  either  the  Municipal  or  the  Saxon  Government 
— I  have  forgotten  which.  It  was  hoped  that  in  this  way 
we  would  acquire  some  knowledge  of  the  German  language 
and  literature.  They  were  the  very  kindest  family  imagi 
nable.  I  shall  never  forget  the  unwearied  patience  of  the 
two  daughters.  The  father  and  mother,  and  a  shy,  thin, 
student  cousin  who  was  living  in  the  flat,  were  no  less  kind. 
Whenever  I  could  get  out  into  the  country  I  collected  speci 
mens  industriously  and  enlivened  the  household  with  hedge 
hogs  and  other  small  beasts  and  reptiles  which  persisted 
in  escaping  from  partially  closed  bureau  drawers.  The  two 
sons  were  fascinating  students  from  the  University  of  Leip- 
sic,  both  of  them  belonging  to  dueling  corps,  and  much 
scarred  in  consequence.  One,  a  famous  swordsman,  was 
called  Der  Rothe  Herzog  (the  Eed  Duke),  and  the  other 
was  nicknamed  Herr  NaseJiorn  (Sir  Ehinoceros)  because 
the  tip  of  his  nose  had  been  cut  off  in  a  duel  and  sewn  on 


BOYHOOD    AND    YOUTH  21 

again.  I  learned  a  good  deal  of  German  here,  in  spite  of 
myself,  and  above  all  I  became  fascinated  with  the  Nibelun- 
genlied.  German  prose  never  became  really  easy  to  me  in 
the  sense  that  French  prose  did,  but  for  German  poetry,  I 
cared  as  much  as  for  English  poetry.  Above  all,  I  gained 
an  impression  of  the  German  people  which  I  never  got 
over.  From  that  time  to  this  it  would  have  been  quite 
impossible  to  make  me  feel  that  the  Germans  were  really 
foreigners.  The  affection,  the  GemuMichkeit  (a  quality 
which  cannot  be  exactly  expressed  by  any  single  English 
word),  the  capacity  for  hard  work,  the  sense  of  duty,  the 
delight  in  studying  literature  and  science,  the  pride  in  the 
new  Germany,  the  more  than  kind  and  friendly  interest 
in  three  strange  children — all  these  manifestations  of  the 
German  character  and  of  German  family  life  made  a  sub 
conscious  impression  upon  me  which  I  did  not  in  the  least 
define  at  the  time,  but  which  is  very  vivid  still  forty  years 
later. 

When  I  got  back  to  America,  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  I  began 
serious  study  to  enter  Harvard  under  Mr.  Arthur  Cutler, 
who  later  founded  the  Cutler  School  in  New  York.  I  could 
not  go  to  school  because  I  knew  so  much  less  than  most 
boys  of  my  age  in  some  subjects  and  so  much  more  in  others. 
In  science  and  history  and  geography  and  in  unexpected 
parts  of  German  and  French  I  was  strong,  but  lamentably 
weak  in  Latin  and  Greek  and  mathematics.  My  grandfather 
had  made  his  summer  home  in  Oyster  Bay  a  number  of 
years  before,  and  my  father  now  made  Oyster  Bay  the 
summer  home  of  his  family  also.  Along  with  my  college 
preparatory  studies  I  carried  on  the  work  of  a  practical 
student  of  natural  history.  I  worked  with  greater  industry 
than  either  intelligence  or  success,  and  made  very  few 
additions  to  the  sum  of  human  knowledge ;  but  to  this  day 
certain  obscure  ornithological  publications  may  be  found 
in  which  are  recorded  such  items  as,  for  instance,  that  on 
one  occasion  a  fish-crow,  and  on  another  an  Ipswich  spar 
row,  were  obtained  by  one  Theodore  Roosevelt,  Jr.,  at 
Oyster  Bay,  on  the  shore  of  Long  Island  Sound. 


22    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

In  the  fall  of  1876  I  entered  Harvard,  graduating  in  1880. 
I  thoroughly  enjoyed  Harvard,  and  I  am  sure  it  did  me 
good,  but  only  in  the  general  effect,  for  there  was  very 
little  in  my  actual  studies  which  helped  me  in  after  life. 
More  than  one  of  my  own  sons  have  already  profited  by 
their  friendship  with  certain  of  their  masters  in  school  or 
college.  I  certainly  profited  by  my  friendship  with  one  of 
my  tutors,  Mr.  Cutler ;  and  in  Harvard  I  owed  much  to  the 
professor  of  English,  Mr.  A.  S.  Hill.  Doubtless  through  my 
own  fault,  I  saw  almost  nothing  of  President  Eliot  and  very 
little  of  the  professors.  I  ought  to  have  gained  much  more 
than  I  did  gain  from  writing  the  themes  and  forensics.  My 
failure  to  do  so  may  have  been  partly  due  to  my  taking  no 
interest  in  the  subjects.  Before  I  left  Harvard  I  was  al 
ready  writing  one  or  two  chapters  of  a  book  I  afterwards 
published  on  the  Naval  War  of  1812.  Those  chapters  were 
so  dry  that  they  would  have  made  a  dictionary  seem  light 
reading  by  comparison.  Still,  they  represented  purpose  and 
serious  interest  on  my  part,  not  the  perfunctory  effort  to 
do  well  enough  to  get  a  certain  mark;  and  corrections  of 
them  by  a  skilled  older  man  would  have  impressed  me  and 
have  commanded  my  respectful  attention.  But  I  was  not 
sufficiently  developed  to  make  myself  take  an  intelligent 
interest  in  some  of  the  subjects  assigned  me — the  character 
of  the  Gracchi,  for  instance.  A  very  clever  and  studious 
lad  would  no  doubt  have  done  so,  but  I  personally  did  not 
grow  up  to  this  particular  subject  until  a  good  many  years 
later.  The  frigate  and  sloop  actions  between  the  American 
and  British  sea-tigers  of  1812  were  much  more  within  my 
grasp.  I  worked  drearily  at  the  Gracchi  because  I  had  to ; 
my  conscientious  and  much-to-be-pitied  professor  dragging 
me  through  the  theme  by  main  strength,  with  my  feet  firmly 
planted  in  dull  and  totally  idea-proof  resistance. 

I  had  at  the  time  no  idea  of  going  into  public  life,  and  I 
never  studied  elocution  or  practiced  debating.  This  was  a 
loss  to  me  in  one  way.  In  another  way  it  was  not.  Per 
sonally  I  have  not  the  slightest  sympathy  with  debating 
contests  in  which  each  side  is  arbitrarily  assigned  a  given 


BOYHOOD  AND   YOUTH  23 

proposition  and  told  to  maintain  it  without  the  least  refer 
ence  to  whether  those  maintaining  it  believe  in  it  or  not, 
I  know  that  under  our  system  this  is  necessary  for  lawyers, 
but  I  emphatically  disbelieve  in  it  as  regards  general  dis 
cussion  of  political,  social,  and  industrial  matters.  What 
we  need  is  to  turn  out  of  our  colleges  young  men  with  ardent 
convictions  on  the  side  of  the  right;  not  young  men  who 
can  make  a  good  argument  for  either  right  or  wrong  as  their 
interest  bids  them.  The  present  method  of  carrying  on 
debates  on  such  subjects  as  "Our  Colonial  Policy,"  or  "The 
Need  of  a  Navy,"  or  "The  Proper  Position  of  the  Courts  in 
Constitutional  Questions,"  encourages  precisely  the  wrong 
attitude  among  those  who  take  part  in  them.  There  is  no 
effort  to  instill  sincerity  and  intensity  of  conviction.  On 
the  contrary,  the  net  result  is  to  make  the  contestants  feel 
that  their  convictions  have  nothing  to  do  with  their  argu 
ments.  I  am  sorry  I  did  not  study  elocution  in  college; 
but  I  am  exceedingly  glad  that  I  did  not  take  part  in  the 
type  of  debate  in  which  stress  is  laid,  not  upon  getting  a 
speaker  to  think  rightly,  but  on  getting  him  to  talk  glibly 
on  the  side  to  which  he  is  assigned,  without  regard  either 
to  what  his  convictions  are  or  to  what  they  ought  to  be. 

I  was  a  reasonably  good  student  in  college,  standing  just 
within  the  first  tenth  of  my  class,  if  I  remember  rightly; 
although  I  am  not  sure  whether  this  means  the  tenth  of  the 
whole  number  that  entered  or  of  those  that  graduated.  I 
was  given  a  Phi  Beta  Kappa  "key."  My  chief  interests 
were  scientific.  When  I  entered  college,  I  was  devoted  to 
out-of-doors  natural  history,  and  my  ambition  was  to  be  a 
scientific  man  of  the  Audubon,  or  Wilson,  or  Baird,  or 
Coues  type — a  man  like  Hart  Merriam,  or  Frank  Chap 
man,  or  Hornaday,  to-day.  My  father  had  from  the  earliest 
days  instilled  into  me  the  knowledge  that  I  was  to  work 
and  to  make  my  own  way  in  the  world,  and  I  had  always 
supposed  that  this  meant  that  I  must  enter  business.  But 
in  my  freshman  year  (he  died  when  I  was  a  sophomore)  he 
told  me  that  if  I  wished  to  become  a  scientific  man  I  could 
do  so.  He  explained  that  I  must  be  sure  that  I  really  in- 


24    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT- AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

tensely  desired  to  do  scientific  work,  because  if  I  went  into 
it  I  must  make  it  a  serious  career ;  that  he  had  made  enough 
money  to  enable  me  to  take  up  such  a  career  and  do  non- 
remunerative  work  of  value  if  I  intended  to  do  the  very  best 
work  there  was  in  me;  but  that  I  must  not  dream  of  taking 
it  up  as  a  dilettante.  He  also  gave  me  a  piece  of  advice 
that  I  have  always  remembered,  namely,  that,  if  I  was  not 
going  to  earn  money,  I  must  even  things  up  by  not  spending 
it.  As  he  expressed  it,  I  had  to  keep  the  fraction  constant, 
and  if  I  was  not  able  to  increase  the  numerator,  then  I 
must  reduce  the  denominator.  In  other  w^ords,  if  I  went 
into  a  scientific  career,  I  must  definitely  abandon  all  thought 
of  the  enjoyment  that  could  accompany  a  money-making 
career,  and  must  find  my  pleasures  elsewhere. 

After  this  conversation  I  fully  intended  to  make  science 
my  life-work.  I  did  not,  for  the  simple  reason  that  at  that 
time  Harvard,  and  I  suppose  our  other  colleges,  utterly 
ignored  the  possibilities  of  the  faunal  naturalist,  the  out 
door  naturalist  and  observer  of  nature.  They  treated  biol 
ogy  as  purely  a  science  of  the  laboratory  and  the  micro 
scope,  a  science  whose  adherents  were  to  spend  their  time 
in  the  study  of  minute  forms  of  marine  life,  or  else  in  sec 
tion-cutting  and  the  study  of  the  tissues  of  the  higher 
organisms  under  the  microscope.  This  attitude  was,  no 
doubt,  in  part  due  to  the  fact  that  in  most  colleges  then 
there  was  a  not  always  intelligent  copying  of  what  was 
done  in  the  great  German  universities.  The  sound  revolt 
against  superficiality  of  study  had  been  carried  to  an  ex 
treme;  thoroughness  in  minutiae  as  the  only  end  of  study 
had  been  erected  into  a  fetish.  There  was  a  total  failure 
to  understand  the  great  variety  of  kinds  of  work  that  could 
be  done  by  naturalists,  including  what  could  be  done  by 
outdoor  naturalists — the  kind  of  work  which  Hart  Merriam 
and  his  assistants  in  the  Biological  Survey  have  carried  to 
such  a  high  degree  of  perfection  as  regards  North  American 
mammals.  In  the  entirely  proper  desire  to  be  thorough  and 
to  avoid  slipshod  methods,  the  tendency  was  to  treat  as 
not  serious,  as  unscientific,  any  kind  of  work  that  was  not 


BOYHOOD    AND    YOUTH  25 

carried  on  with  laborious  minuteness  in  the  laboratory. 
My  taste  was  specialized  in  a  totally  different  direction, 
and  I  had  no  more  desire  or  ability  to  be  a  microscopist 
and  section-cutter  than  to  be  a  mathematician.  Accord 
ingly  I  abandoned  all  thought  of  becoming  a  scientist. 
Doubtless  this  meant  that  I  really  did  not  have  the  intense 
devotion  to  science  which  I  thought  I  had;  for,  if  I  had 
possessed  such  devotion,  I  would  have  carved  out  a  career 
for  myself  somehow  without  regard  to  discouragements. 

As  regards  political  economy,  I  was  of  course  while  in 
college  taught  the  laissez-faire  doctrines — one  of  them  be 
ing  free  trade — then  accepted  as  canonical.  Most  Amer 
ican  boys  of  my  age  were  taught  both  by  their  surroundings 
and  by  their  studies  certain  principles  which  were  very 
valuable  from  the  standpoint  of  National  interest,  and  cer 
tain  others  which  were  very  much  the  reverse.  The  polit 
ical  economists  were  not  especially  to  blame  for  this ;  it  was 
the  general  attitude  of  the  writers  who  wrote  for  us  of 
that  generation.  Take  my  beloved  Our  Young  Folks,  the 
magazine  of  which  I  have  already  spoken,  and  which  taught 
me  much  more  than  any  of  my  text-books.  Everything 
in  this  magazine  instilled  the  individual  virtues,  and  the 
necessity  of  character  as  the  chief  factor  in  any  man's 
success — a  teaching  in  which  I  now  believe  as  sincerely  as 
ever,  for  all  the  laws  that  the  wit  of  man  can  devise  will 
never  make  a  man  a  worthy  citizen  unless  he  has  within 
himself  the  right  stuff,  unless  he  has  self-reliance,  energy, 
courage,  the  power  of  insisting  on  his  own  rights  and  the 
sympathy  that  makes  him  regardful  of  the  rights  of  others. 
All  this  individual  morality  I  was  taught  by  the  books  I 
read  at  home  and  the  books  I  studied  at  Harvard.  But 
there  was  almost  no  teaching  of  the  need  for  collective 
action,  and  of  the  fact  that  in  addition  to,  not  as  a  sub 
stitute  for,  individual  responsibility,  there  is  a  collective 
responsibility.  Books  such  as  Herbert  Croly's  "Promise 
of  American  Life"  and  Walter  E.  Weyl's  "New  Democ 
racy"  would  generally  at  that  time  have  been  treated  either 
as  unintelligible  or  else  as  pure  heresy. 


26    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

The  teaching  which  I  received  was  genuinely  democratic 
in  one  way.  It  was  not  so  democratic  in  another.  I  grew 
into  manhood  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  feeling  that  a 
man  must  be  respected  for  what  he  made  of  himself.  But 
I  had  also,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  been  taught  that 
socially  and  industrially  pretty  much  the  whole  duty  of 
the  man  lay  in  thus  making  the  best  of  himself;  that  he 
should  be  honest  in  his  dealings  with  others  and  charitable 
in  the  old-fashioned  way  to  the  unfortunate;  but  that  it 
was  no  part  of  his  business  to  join  with  others  in  trying  to 
make  things  better  for  the  many  by  curbing  the  abnormal 
and  excessive  development  of  individualism  in  a  few.  Now 
I  do  not  mean  that  this  training  was  by  any  means  all  bad. 
On  the  contrary,  the  insistence  upon  individual  responsi 
bility  was,  and  is,  and  always  will  be,  a  prime  necessity. 
Teaching  of  the  kind  I  absorbed  from  both  my  text-books 
and  my  surroundings  is  a  healthy  anti-scorbutic  to  the  sen 
timentality  which  by  complacently  excusing  the  individual 
for  all  his  shortcomings  would  finally  hopelessly  weaken  the 
spring  of  moral  purpose.  It  also  keeps  alive  that  virile 
vigor  for  the  lack  of  which  in  the  average  individual  no 
possible  perfection  of  law  or  of  community  action  can  ever 
atone.  But  such  teaching,  if  not  corrected  by  other  teaching, 
means  acquiescence  in  a  riot  of  lawless  business  individual 
ism  which  would  be  quite  as  destructive  to  real  civilization 
as  the  lawless  military  individualism  of  the  Dark  Ages. 
I  left  college  and  entered  the  big  world  owing  more  than 
I  can  express  to  the  training  I  had  received,  especially  in 
my  own  home ;  but  with  much  else  also*  to  learn  if  I  were 
to  become  really  fitted  to  do  my  part  in  the  work  that  lay 
ahead  for  the  generation  of  Americans  to  which  I  belonged. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  VIGOR  OF  LIFE 

LOOKING  back,  a  man  really  has  a  more  objective  feeling 
about  himself  as  a  child  than  he  has  about  his  father  or 
mother.  He  feels  as  if  that  child  were  not  the  present  he, 
individually,  but  an  ancestor ;  just  as  much  an  ancestor  as 
either  of  his  parents.  The  saying  that  the  child  is  the 
father  to  the  man  may  be  taken  in  a  sense  almost  the 
reverse  of  that  usually  given  to  it.  The  child  is  father  to 
the  man  in  the  sense  that  his  individuality  is  separate  from 
the  individuality  of  the  grown-up  into  which  he  turns. 
This  is  perhaps  one  reason  why  a  man  can  speak  of  his 
childhood  and  early  youth  with  a  sense  of  detachment. 

Having  been  a  sickly  boy,  with  no  natural  bodily  prow 
ess,  and  having  lived  much  at  home,  I  was  at  first  quite 
unable  to  hold  my  own  when  thrown  into  contact  with 
other  boys  of  rougher  antecedents.  I  was  nervous  and 
timid.  Yet  from  reading  of  the  people  I  admired — ranging 
from  the  soldiers  of  Valley  Forge,  and  Morgan's  riflemen, 
to  the  heroes  of  my  favorite  stories — and  from  hearing  of 
the  feats  performed  by  my  Southern  forefathers  and  kins 
folk,  and  from  knowing  my  father,  I  felt  a  great  admiration 
for  men  who  were  fearless  and  who  could  hold  their  own 
in  the  world,  and  I  had  a  great  desire  to  be  like  them. 
Until  I  was  nearly  fourteen  I  let  this  desire  take  no  more 
definite  shape  than  day-dreams.  Then  an  incident  hap 
pened  that  did  me  real  good.  Having  an  attack  of  asthma, 
I  was  sent  off  by  myself  to  Moosehead  Lake.  On  the  stage 
coach  ride  thither  I  encountered  a  couple  of  other  boys 
who  were  about  my  own  age,  but  very  much  more  com 
petent  and  also  much  more  mischievous.  I  have  no  doubt 
they  were  good-hearted  boys,  but  they  were  boys!  They 

27 


28    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

found  that  I  was  a  foreordained  and  predestined  victim, 
and  industriously  proceeded  to  make  life  miserable  for  me. 
The  worst  feature  was  that  when  I  finally  tried  to  fight 
them  I  discovered  that  either  one  singly  could  not  only 
handle  me  with  easy  contempt,  but  handle  me  so  as  not 
to  hurt  me  much  and  yet  to  prevent  my  doing  any  damage 
whatever  in  return. 

The  experience  taught  me  what  probably  no  amount  of 
good  advice  could  have  taught  me.  I  made  up  my  mind 
that  I  must  try  to  learn  so  that  I  would  not  again  be  put  in 
such  a  helpless  position;  and  having  become  quickly  and 
bitterly  conscious  that  I  did  not  have  the  natural  prowess 
to  hold  my  own,  I  decided  that  I  would  try  to  supply  its 
place  by  training.  Accordingly,  with  my  father's  hearty 
approval,  I  started  to  learn  to  box.  I  was  a  painfully  slow 
and  awkward  pupil,  and  certainly  worked  two  or  three 
years  before  I  made  any  perceptible  improvement  what 
ever.  My  first  boxing-master  was  John  Long,  an  ex-prize 
fighter.  I  can  see  his  rooms  now,  with  colored  pictures  of 
the  fights  between  Tom  Hyer  and  Yankee  Sullivan,  and 
Heenan  and  Sayers,  and  other  great  events  in  the  annals 
of  the  squared  circle.  On  one  occasion,  to  excite  interest 
among  his  patrons,  he  held  a  series  of  "championship" 
matches  for  the  different  weights,  the  prizes  being,  at  least 
in  my  own  class,  pewter  mugs  of  a  value,  I  should  suppose, 
approximating  fifty  cents.  Neither  he  nor  I  had  any  idea 
that  I  could  do  anything,  but  I  was  entered  in  the  light 
weight  contest,  in  which  it  happened  that  I  was  pitted  in 
succession  against  a  couple  of  reedy  striplings  who  were 
even  worse  than  I  was.  Equally  to  their  surprise  and  to 
my  own,  and  to  John  Long's,  I  won,  and  the  pewter  mug 
became  one  of  my  most  prized  possessions.  I  kept  it,  and 
alluded  to  it,  and  I  fear  bragged  about  it,  for  a  number 
of  years,  and  I  only  wish  I  knew  where  it  was  now.  Years 
later  I  read  an  account  of  a  little  man  who  once  in  a  fifth- 
rate  handicap  race  won  a  worthless  pewter  medal  and  joyed 
in  it  ever  after.  Well,  as  soon  as  I  read  that  story  I  felt 
that  that  little  man  and  I  were  brothers. 


THE    VIGOR   OF   LIFE  29 

This  was,  as  far  as  I  remember,  the  only  one  of  my 
exceedingly  rare  athletic  triumphs  which  would  be  worth 
relating.  I  did  a  good  deal  of  boxing  and  wrestling  in 
Harvard,  but  never  attained  to  the  first  rank  in  either, 
even  at  my  own  weight.  Once,  in  the  big  contests  in  the 
Gym,  I  got  either  into  the  finals  or  semi-finals,  I  forget 
which;  but  aside  from  this  the  chief  part  I  played  was 
to  act  as  trial  horse  for  some  friend  or  classmate  who  did 
have  a  chance  of  distinguishing  himself  in  the  champion 
ship  contests. 

I  was  fond  of  horseback-riding,  but  I  took  to  it  slowly 
and  with  difficulty,  exactly  as  with  boxing.  It  was  a  long 
time  before  I  became  even  a  respectable  rider,  and  I  never 
got  much  higher.  I  mean  by  this  that  I  never  became  a 
first-flight  man  in  the  hunting  field,  and  never  even  ap 
proached  the  bronco-busting  class  in  the  West.  Any  man, 
if  he  chooses,  can  gradually  school  himself  to  the  requisite 
nerve,  and  gradually  learn  the  requisite  seat  and  hands, 
that  will  enable  him  to  do  respectably  across  country,  or  to 
perform  the  average  work  on  a  ranch.  Of  my  ranch  expe 
riences  I  shall  speak  later.  At  intervals  after  leaving  col 
lege  I  hunted  on  Long  Island  with  the  Meadowbrook  hounds. 
Almost  the  only  experience  I  ever  had  in  this  connection 
that  was  of  any  interest  was  on  one  occasion  when  I  broke 
my  arm.  My  purse  did  not  permit  me  to  own  expensive 
horses.  On  this  occasion  I  was  riding  an  animal,  a  buggy 
horse  originally,  which  its  owner  sold  because  now  and  then 
it  insisted  on  thoughtfully  lying  down  when  in  harness. 
It  never  did  this  under  the  saddle ;  and  when  he  turned  it 
out  to  grass  it  would  solemnly  hop  over  the  fence  and  get 
somewhere  where  it  did  not  belong.  The  last  trait  was 
what  converted  it  into  a  hunter.  It  was  a  natural  jumper, 
although  without  any  speed.  On  the  hunt  in  question  I 
got  along  very  well  until  the  pace  winded  my  ex-buggy 
horse,  and  it  turned  a  somersault  over  a  fence.  When  I 
got  on  it  after  the  fall  I  found  I  could  not  use  my  left  arm. 
I  supposed  it  was  merely  a  strain.  The  buggy  horse  was  a 
sedate  animal  which  I  rode  with  a  snaffle.  So  we  pounded 


30    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

along  at  the  tail  of  the  hunt,  and  I  did  not  appreciate  that 
my  arm  was  broken  for  three  or  four  fences.  Then  we 
came  to  a  big  drop,  and  the  jar  made  the  bones  slip  past 
one  another  so  as  to  throw  the  hand  out  of  position.  It 
did  not  hurt  me  at  all,  and  as  the  horse  was  as  easy  to  sit 
as  a  rocking-chair,  I  got  in  at  the  death. 

I  think  August  Belmont  was  master  of  the  hunt  when 
the  above  incident  occurred.  I  know  he  was  master  on 
another  occasion  on  which  I  met  with  a  mild  adventure. 
On  one  of  the  hunts  when  I  was  out  a  man  was  thrown, 
dragged  by  one  stirrup,  and  killed.  In  consequence  I  bought 
a  pair  of  safety  stirrups,  which  I  used  the  next  time  I 
went  out.  Within  five  minutes  after  the  run  began  I  found 
that  the  stirrups  were  so  very  "safe"  that  they  would  not 
stay  in  at  all.  First  one  went  off  at  one  jump,  and  then 
the  other  at  another  jump — with  a  fall  for  me  on  each 
occasion.  I  hated  to  give  up  the  fun  so  early,  and  accord 
ingly  finished  the  run  without  any  stirrups.  My  horse  never 
went  as  fast  as  on  that  run.  Doubtless  a  first-class  horse 
man  can  ride  as  well  without  stirrups  as  with  them.  But 
I  was  not  a  first-class  horseman.  When  anything  unex 
pected  happened,  I  was  apt  to  clasp  the  solemn  buggy  horse 
firmly  with  my  spurred  heels,  and  the  result  was  that  he 
laid  himself  out  to  do  his  best  in  the  way  of  galloping. 
He  speedily  found  that,  thanks  to  the  snaffle  bit,  I  could  not 
pull  him  in,  so  when  we  came  to  a  down  grade  he  would 
usually  put  on  steam.  Then  if  there  was  a  fence  at  the 
bottom  and  he  checked  at  all,  I  was  apt  to  shoot  forward, 
and  in  such  event  we  went  over  the  fence  in  a  way  that 
reminded  me  of  Leech's  picture,  in  Punch,  of  Mr.  Tom 
Noddy  and  his  mare  jumping  a  fence  in  the  following  order ; 
Mr.  Tom  Noddy,  I;  his  mare,  II.  However,  I  got  in  at 
the  death  this  time  also. 

I  was  fond  of  walking  and  climbing.  As  a  lad  I  used 
to  go  to  the  north  woods,  in  Maine,  both  in  fall  and  winter. 
There  I  made  life  friends  of  two  men,  Will  Dow  and  Bill 
Sewall;  I  canoed  with  them,  and  tramped  through  the  woods 
with  them,  visiting  the  winter  logging  camps  on  snow-shoes. 


THE   VIGOR   OF   LIFE  31 

Afterwards  they  were  with  me  in  the  West.  Will  Dow  is 
dead.  Bill  Sewall  was  collector  of  customs  under  me,  on 
the  Aroostook  border.  Except  when  hunting  I  never 
'did  any  mountaineering  save  for  a  couple  of  conventional 
trips  up  the  Matterhorn  and  the  Jungfrau  on  one  occasion 
when  I  was  in  Switzerland. 

I  never  did  much  with  the  shotgun,  but  I  practiced  a  good 
deal  with  the  rifle.  I  had  a  rifle  range  at  Sagamore  Hill, 
where  I  often  took  friends  to  shoot.  Once  or  twice  when 
I  was  visited  by  parties  of  released  Boer  prisoners,  after 
the  close  of  the  South  African  War,  they  and  I  held  shoot 
ing  matches  together.  The  best  man  with  both  pistol  and 
rifle  who  ever  shot  there  was  Stewart  Edward  White. 
Among  the  many  other  good  men  was  a  stanch  friend, 
Baron  Speck  von  Sternberg,  afterwards  German  Ambas 
sador  at  Washington  during  my  Presidency.  He  was  a 
capital  shot,  rider,  and  walker,  a  devoted  and  most  efficient 
servant  of  Germany,  who  had  fought  with  distinction  in 
the  Franco-German  War  when  barely  more  than  a  boy; 
he  was  the  hero  of  the  story  of  "the  pig  dog"  in  Archibald 
Forbes 's  volume  of  reminiscences.  It  was  he  who  first 
talked  over  with  me  the  raising  of  a  regiment  of  horse 
riflemen  from  among  the  ranchmen  and  cowboys  of  the 
plains.  When  Ambassador,  the  poor,  gallant,  tender 
hearted  fellow  was  dying  of  a  slow  and  painful  disease, 
so  that  he  could  not  play  with  the  rest  of  us,  but  the  agony 
of  his  mortal  illness  never  in  the  slightest  degree  inter 
fered  with  his  work.  Among  the  other  men  who  shot  and 
rode  and  walked  with  me  was  Cecil  Spring-Rice,  who  has 
just  been  appointed  British  Ambassador  to  the  United 
States.  He  was  my  groomsman,  my  best  man,  when  I  was 
married — at  St.  George 's,  Hanover  Square,  which  made  me 
feel  as  if  I  were  living  in  one  of  Thackeray's  novels. 

My  own  experience  as  regards  marksmanship  was  much 
the  same  as  my  experience  as  regards  horsemanship.  There 
are  men  whose  eye  and  hand  are  so  quick  and  so  sure  that 
'they  achieve  a  perfection  of  marksmanship  to  which  no 
practice  will  enable  ordinary  men  to  attain.  There  are 


32    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

other  men  who  cannot  learn  to  shoot  with  any  accuracy  at 
all.  In  between  come  the  mass  of  men  of  ordinary  abilities 
who,  if  they  choose  resolutely  to  practice,  can  by  sheer 
industry  and  judgment  make  themselves  fair  rifle  shots. 
The  men  who  show  this  requisite  industry  and  judgment 
can  without  special  difficulty  raise  themselves  to  the  second 
class  of  respectable  rifle  shots ;  and  it  is  to  this  class  that 
I  belong.  But  to  have  reached  this  point  of  marksmanship 
with  the  rifle  at  a  target  by  no  means  implies  ability  to  hit 
game  in  the  field,  especially  dangerous  game.  All  kinds 
of  other  qualities,  moral  and  physical,  enter  into  being  a 
good  hunter,  and  especially  a  good  hunter  after  dangerous 
game,  just  as  all  kinds  of  other  qualities  in  addition  to  skill 
with  the  rifle  enter  into  being  a  good  soldier.  With  dan* 
gerous  game,  after  a  fair  degree  of  efficiency  with  the  rifle 
has  been  attained,  the  prime  requisites  are  cool  judgment 
and  that  kind  of  nerve  which  consists  in  avoiding  being 
rattled.  Any  beginner  is  apt  to  have  "buck  fever,"  and 
therefore  no  beginner  should  go  at  dangerous  game. 

Buck  fever  means  a  state  of  intense  nervous  excitement 
which  may  be  entirely  divorced  from  timidity.  It  may 
affect  a  man  the  first  time  he  has  to  speak  to  a  large  audi 
ence  just  as  it  affects  him  the  first  time  he  sees  a  buck  or 
goes  into  battle.  What  such  a  man  needs  is  not  courage 
but  nerve  control,  cool-headedness.  This  he  can  get  only 
by  actual  practice.  He  must,  by  custom  and  repeated  ex 
ercise  of  self-mastery,  get  his  nerves  thoroughly  under 
control.  This  is  largely  a  matter  of  habit,  in  the  sense  of 
repeated  effort  and  repeated  exercise  of  will  power.  If 
the  man  has  the  right  stuff  in  him,  his  will  grows  stronger 
and  stronger  with  each  exercise  of  it — and  if  he  has  not  the 
right  stuff  in  him  he  had  better  keep  clear  of  dangerous 
game  hunting,  or  indeed  of  any  other  form  of  sport  or  work 
in  which  there  is  bodily  peril. 

After  he  has  achieved  the  ability  to  exercise  wariness 
and  judgment  and  the  control  over  his  nerves  which  will 
make  him  shoot  as  well  at  the  game  as  at  a  target,  he  can 
begin  his  essays  at  dangerous  game  hunting,  and  he  will 


THE    VIGOR   OF   LIFE  33 

then  find  that  it  does  not  demand  such  abnormal  prowess 
as  the  outsider  is  apt  to  imagine.  A  man  who  can  hit  a 
soda-water  bottle  at  the  distance  of  a  few  yards  can  brain 
a  lion  or  a  bear  or  an  elephant  at  that  distance,  and  if  he 
cannot  brain  it  when  it  charges  he  can  at  least  bring  it  to 
a  standstill.  All  he  has  to  do  is  to  shoot  as  accurately  as 
he  would  at  a  soda-water  bottle;  and  to  do  this  requires 
nerve,  at  least  as  much  as  it  does  physical  address.  Having 
reached  this  point,  the  hunter  must  not  imagine  that  he  is 
warranted  in  taking  desperate  chances.  There  are  degrees 
in  proficiency;  and  what  is  a  warrantable  and  legitimate 
risk  for  a  man  to  take  when  he  has  reached  a  certain  grade 
of  efficiency  may  be  a  foolish  risk  for  him  to  take  before 
he  has  reached  that  grade.  A  man  who  has  reached  the 
degree  of  proficiency  indicated  above  is  quite  warranted 
in  walking  in  at  a  lion  at  bay,  in  an  open  plain,  to,  say, 
within  a  hundred  yards.  If  the  lion  has  not  charged,  the 
man  ought  at  that  distance  to  knock  him  over  and  prevent 
his  charging;  and  if  the  lion  is  already  charging,  the  man 
ought  at  that  distance  to  be  able  to  stop  him.  But  the 
amount  of  prowess  which  warrants  a  man  in  relying  on  his 
ability  to  perform  this  feat  does  not  by  any  means  justify 
him  in  thinking  that,  for  instance,  he  can  crawl  after  a 
wounded  lion  into  thick  cover.  I  have  known  men  of  in 
different  prowess  to  perform  this  latter  feat  successfully, 
but  at  least  as  often  they  have  been  unsuccessful,  and  in 
these  cases  the  result  has  been  unpleasant.  The  man  who 
habitually  follows  wounded  lions  into  thick  cover  must  be 
a  hunter  of  the  highest  skill,  or  he  can  count  with  certainty 
on  an  ultimate  mauling. 

The  first  two  or  three  bucks  I  ever  saw  gave  me  buck 
fever  badly,  but  after  I  had  gained  experience  with  ordinary 
game  I  never  had  buck  fever  at  all  with  dangerous  game. 
In  my  case  the  overcoming  of  buck  fever  was  the  result 
of  conscious  effort  and  a  deliberate  determination  to  over 
come  it.  More  happily  constituted  men  never  have  to  make 
this  determined  effort  at  all — which  may  perhaps  show  that 


34    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

the  average  man  can  profit  more  from  my  experiences 
than  he  can  from  those  of  the  exceptional  man. 

I  have  shot  only  five  kinds  of  animals  which  can  fairly 
be  called  dangerous  game — that  is,  the  lion,  elephant,  rhi 
noceros,  and  buffalo  in  Africa,  .and  the  big  grizzly  bear 
a  quarter  of  a  century  ago  in  the  Eockies.  Taking  into 
account  not  only  my  own  personal  experience,  but  the  ex 
periences  of  many  veteran  hunters,  I  regard  all  the  four 
African  animals,  but  especially  the  lion,  elephant,  and 
buffalo,  as  much  more  dangerous  than  the  grizzly.  As 
it  happened,  however,  the  only  narrow  escape  1  personally 
ever  had  was  from  a  grizzly,  and  in  Africa  the  animal 
killed  closest  to  me  as  it  was  charging  was  a  rhinoceros 
— all  of  which  goes  to  show  that  a  man  must  not  generalize 
too  broadly  from  his  own  personal  experiences.  On  the 
whole,  I  think  the  lion  the  most  dangerous  of  all  these  five 
animals;  that  is,  I  think  that,  if  fairly  hunted,  there  is  a 
larger  percentage  of  hunters  killed  or  mauled  for  a  given 
number  of  lions  killed  than  for  a  given  number  of  any  one 
of  the  other  animals.  Yet  I  personally  had  no  difficulties 
with  lions.  I  twice  killed  lions  which  were  at  bay  and  just 
starting  to  charge,  and  I  killed  a  heavy-maned  male  while 
it  was  in  full  charge.  But  in  each  instance  I  had  plenty  of 
leeway,  the  animal  being  so  far  off  that  even  if  my  bullet 
had  not  beenrf atal  I  should  have  had  time  for  a  couple  more 
shots.  The  African  buffalo  is  undoubtedly  a  dangerous 
beast,  but  it  happened  that  the  few  that  I  shot  did  not 
charge.  A  bull  elephant,  a  vicious  "rogue,"  which  had 
been  killing  people  in  the  native  villages,  did  charge  before 
being  shot  at.  My  son  Kermit  and  I  stopped  it  at  forty 
yards.  Another  bull  elephant,  also  unwounded,  which 
charged,  nearly  got  me,  as  I  had  just  fired  both  cartridges 
from  my  heavy  double-barreled  rifle  in  killing  the  bull  I 
was  after — the  first  wild  elephant  I  had  ever  seen.  The 
second  bull  came  through  the  thick  brush  to  my  left  like  a 
steam  plow  through  a  light  snowdrift,  everything  snapping 
before  his  rush,  and  was  so  near  that  he  could  have  hit 
me  with  his  trunk.  I  slipped  past  him  behind  a  tree.  Peo- 


THE   VIGOR   OF   LIFE  35 

pie  have  asked  me  how  I  felt  on  this  occasion.  My  answer 
has  always  been  that  I  suppose  I  felt  as  most  men  of  like 
experience  feel  on  such  occasions.  At  such  a  moment  a 
hunter  is  so  very  busy  that  he  has  no  time  to  get  frightened. 
He  wants  to  get  in  his  cartridges  and  try  another  shot. 

Ehinoceros  are  truculent,  blustering  beasts,  much  the 
most  stupid  of  all  the  dangerous  game  I  know.  Generally 
their  attitude  is  one  of  mere  stupidity  and  bluff.  But  on 
occasions  they  do  charge  wickedly,  both  when  wounded  and 
when  entirely  unprovoked.  The  first  I  ever  shot  I  mortally 
wounded  at  a  few  rods'  distance,  and  it  charged  with  the 
utmost  determination,  whereat  I  and  my  companion  both 
fired,  and  more  by  good  luck  than  anything  else  brought 
it  to  the  ground  just  thirteen  paces  from  where  we  stood. 
Another  rhinoceros  may  or  may  not  have  been  meaning 
to  charge  me;  I  have  never  been  certain  which.  It  heard 
us  and  came  at  us  through  rather  thick  brush,  snorting  and 
tossing  its  head.  I  am  by  no  means  sure  that  it  had  fixedly 
hostile  intentions,  and  indeed  with  my  present  experience 
I  think  it  likely  that  if  I  had  not  fired  it  would  have  flinched 
at  the  last  moment  and  either  retreated  or  gone  by  me. 
But  I  am  not  a  rhinoceros  mind  reader,  and  its  actions 
were  such  as  to  warrant  my  regarding  it  as  a  suspicious 
character.  I  stopped  it  with  a  couple  of  bullets,  and  then 
followed  it  up  and  killed  it.  The  skins  of  all  these  ani 
mals  which  I  thus  killed  are  in  the  National  Museum  at 
Washington. 

But,  as  I  said  above,  the  only  narrow  escape  I  met  with 
was  not  from  one  of  these  dangerous  African  animals,  but 
from  a  grizzly  bear.  It  was  about  twenty-four  years  ago. 
I  had  wounded  the  bear  just  at  sunset,  in  a  wood  of  lodge- 
pole  pines,  and,  following  him,  I  wounded  him  again,  as 
he  stood  on  the  other  side  of  a  thicket.  He  then  charged 
through  the  brush,  coming  with  such  speed  and  with  such 
an  irregular  gait  that,  try  as  I  would,  I  was  not  able  to  get 
the  sight  of  my  rifle  on  the  brain-pan,  though  I  hit  him 
very  hard  with  both  the  remaining  barrels  of  my  magazine 
Winchester.  It  was  in  the  days  of  black  powder,  and  the 


36    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

smoke  hung.  After  my  last  shot,  the  first  thing  I  saw  was 
the  bear's  left  paw  as  he  struck  at  me,  so  close  that  I  made 
a  quick  movement  to  one  side.  He  was,  however,  practically 
already  dead,  and  after  another  jump,  and  while  in  the 
very  act  of  trying  to  turn  to  come  at  me,  he  collapsed  like 
a  shot  rabbit. 

By  the  way,  I  had  a  most  exasperating  time  trying  to 
bring  in  his  skin.  I  was  alone,  traveling  on  foot  with  one 
very  docile  little  mountain  mare  for  a  pack  pony.  The 
little  mare  cared  nothing  for  bears  or  anything  else,  so  there 
was  no  difficulty  in  packing  her.  But  the  man  without 
experience  can  hardly  realize  the  work  it  was  to  get  that 
bearskin  off  the  carcass  and  then  to  pack  it,  wet,  slippery, 
and  heavy,  so  that  it  would  ride  evenly  on  the  pony.  I  was 
at  the  time  fairly  well  versed  in  packing  with  a  "  diamond 
hitch,"  the  standby  of  Eocky  Mountain  packers  in  my  day; 
but  the  diamond  hitch  is  a  two-man  job;  and  even  working 
with  a  " squaw  hitch,"  I  got  into  endless  trouble  with  that 
wet  and  slippery  bearskin.  With  infinite  labor  I  would  get 
the  skin  on  the  pony  and  run  the  ropes  over  it  until  to  all 
seeming  it  was  fastened  properly.  Then  off  we  would 
start,  and  after  going  about  a  hundred  yards  I  would  notice 
the  hide  beginning  to  bulge  through  between  two  ropes, 
I  would  shift  one  of  them,  and  then  the  hide  would  bulge 
somewhere  else.  I  would  shift  the  rope  again;  and  still 
the  hide  would  flow  slowly  out  as  if  it  was  lava.  The  first 
thing  I  knew  it  would  come  down  on  one  side,  and  the  little 
mare,  with  her  feet  planted  resolutely,  would  wait  for  me 
to  perform  my  part  by  getting  that  bearskin  back  in  its 
proper  place  on  the  McClellan  saddle  which  I  was  using  as 
a  makeshift  pack  saddle.  The  feat  of  killing  the  bear  the 
previous  day  sank  into  nothing  compared  with  the  feat  of 
making  the  bearskin  ride  properly  as  a  pack  on  the  follow- 
ing  three  days. 

The  reason  why  I  was  alone  in  the  mountains  on  this 
occasion  was  because,  for  the  only  time  in  all  my  experience, 
I  had  a  difficulty  with  my  guide.  He  was  a  crippled  old 
mountain  man,  with  a  profound  contempt  for  "tenderfeet," 


THE   VIGOR   OP   LIFE  37 

a  contempt  that  in  my  case  was  accentuated  by  the  fact 
that  I  wore  spectacles — which  at  that  day  and  in  that 
region  were  usually  held  to  indicate  a  defective  moral 
character  in  the  wearer.  He  had  never  previously  acted  as 
guide,  or,  as  he  expressed  it,  "trundled  a  tenderfoot,"  and 
though  a  good  hunter,  who  showed  me  much  game,  our 
experience  together  was  not  happy.  He  was  very  rheumatic 
and  liked  to  lie  abed  late,  so  that  I  usually  had  to  get 
breakfast,  and,  in  fact,  do  most  of  the  work  around  camp. 
Finally  one  day  he  declined  to  go  out  with  me,  saying  that 
he  had  a  pain.  When,  that  afternoon,  I  got  back  to  camp,  I 
speedily  found  what  the  "pain"  was.  We  were  traveling 
very  light  indeed,  I  having  practically  nothing  but  my 
buffalo  sleeping-bag,  my  wash  kit,  and  a  pair  of  socks.  I 
had  also  taken  a  flask  of  whisky  for  emergencies — al 
though,  as  I  found  that  the  emergencies  never  arose  and 
that  tea  was  better  than  whisky  when  a  man  was  cold  or 
done  out,  I  abandoned  the  practice  of  taking  whisky  on 
hunting  trips  twenty  years  ago.  When  I  got  back  to  camp 
the  old  fellow  was  sitting  on  a  tree-trunk,  very  erect,  with 
his  rifle  across  his  knees,  and  in  response  to  my  nod  of 
greeting  he  merely  leered  at  me.  I  leaned  my  rifle  against 
a  tree,  walked  over  to  where  my  bed  was  lying,  and,  hap 
pening  to  rummage  in  it  for  something,  I  found  the  whisky 
flask  was  empty.  I  turned  on  him  at  once  and  accused  him 
of  having  drunk  it,  to  which  he  merely  responded  by  asking 
what  I  was  going  to  do  about  it.  There  did  not  seem  much 
to  do,  so  I  said  that  we  would  part  company — we  were 
only  four  or  five  days  from  a  settlement — and  I  would  go 
in  alone,  taking  one  of  the  horses.  He  responded  by  cock 
ing  his  rifle  and  saying  that  I  could  go  alone  and  be  damned 
to  me,  but  I  could  not  take  any  horse.  I  answered  "all 
right,"  that  if  I  could  not  I  could  not,  and  began  to  move 
around  to  get  some  flour  and  salt  pork.  He  was  misled 
by  my  quietness  and  by  the  fact  that  I  had  not  in  any  way 
resented  either  his  actions  or  his  language  during  the  days 
we  had  been  together,  and  did  not  watch  me  as  closely  as 
he  ought  to  have  done.  He  was  sitting  with  the  cocked 


38    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

rifle  across  his  knees,  the  muzzle  to  the  left.  My  rifle  was 
leaning  against  a  tree  near  the  cooking  things  to  his  right. 
Managing  to  get  near  it,  I  whipped  it  up  and  threw  the 
bead  on  him,  calling,  " Hands  up!"  He  of  course  put  up 
his  hands,  and  then  said,  "Oh,  come,  I  was  only  joking"; 
to  which  I  answered,  "Well,  I  am  not.  Now  straighten 
your  legs  and  let  your  rifle  go  to  the  ground."  He  re 
monstrated,  saying  the  rifle  would  go  oft,  and  I  told  him 
to  let  it  go  off.  However,  he  straightened  his  legs  in  such 
fashion  that  it  came  to  the  ground  without  a  jar.  I  then 
made  him  move  back,  and  picked  up  the  rifle.  By  this  time 
he  was  quite  sober,  and  really  did  not  seem  angry,  looking  at 
me  quizzically.  He  told  me  that  if  I  would  give  him  back 
his  rifle,  he  would  call  it  quits  and  we  could  go  on  together. 
I  did  not  think  it  best  to  trust  him,  so  I  told  him  that  our 
hunt  was  pretty  well  through,  anyway,  and  that  I  would  go 
home.  There  was  a  blasted  pine  on  the  trail,  in  plain  view  of 
the  camp,  about  a  mile  off,  and  I  told  him  that  I  would 
leave  his  rifle  at  that  blasted  pine  if  I  could  see  him  in  camp, 
but  that  he  must  not  come  after  me,  for  if  he  did  I  should 
assume  that  it  was  with  hostile  intent  and  would  shoot. 
He  said  he  had  no  intention  of  coming  after  me ;  and  as  he 
was  very  much  crippled  with  rheumatism,  I  did  not  believe 
he  would  do  so. 

Accordingly  I  took  the  little  mare,  with  nothing  but  some 
flour,  bacon,  and  tea,  and  my  bed-roll,  and  started  off. 
At  the  blasted  pine  I  looked  round,  and  as  I  could  see  him 
in  camp,  I  left  his  rifle  there.  I  then  traveled  till  dark,  and 
that  night,  for  the  only  time  in  my  experience,  I  used  in 
camping  a  trick  of  the  old-time  trappers  in  the  Indian  days. 
I  did  not  believe  I  would  be  followed,  but  still  it  was  not  pos 
sible  to  be  sure,  so,  after  getting  supper,  while  my  pony  fed 
round,  I  left  the  fire  burning,  repacked  the  mare  and  pushed 
ahead  until  it  literally  became  so  dark  that  I  could  not  see. 
Then  I  picketed  the  mare,  slept  where  I  was  without  a  fire 
until  the  first  streak  of  dawn,  and  then  pushed  on  for  a 
couple  of  hours  before  halting  to  take  breakfast  and  to  let 
the  little  mare  have  a  good  feed.  No  plainsman  needs  to 


THE   VIGOR  OF  LIFE  39 

be  told  that  a  man  should  not  lie  near  a  fire  if  there  is  danger 
of  an  enemy  creeping  up  on  him,  and  that  above  all  a  man 
should  not  put  himself  in  a  position  where  he  can  be  am 
bushed  at  dawn.  On  this  second  day  I  lost  the  trail,  and 
towards  nightfall  gave  up  the  effort  to  find  it,  camped 
where  I  was,  and  went  out  to  shoot  a  grouse  for  supper.  It 
was  while  hunting  in  vain  for  a  grouse  that  I  came  on  the 
bear  and  killed  it  as  above  described. 

When  I  reached  the  settlement  and  went  into  the  store, 
the  storekeeper  identified  me  by  remarking;  "  You  're  the 
tenderfoot  that  old  Hank  was  trundling,  ain't  you!"  I 
admitted  that  I  was.  A  good  many  years  later,  after  I  had 
been  elected  Vice-President,  I  went  on  a  cougar  hunt  in 
northwestern  Colorado  with  Johnny  Goff,  a  famous  hunter 
and  mountain  man.  It  was  midwinter.  I  was  rather 
proud  of  my  achievements,  and  pictured  myself  as  being 
known  to  the  few  settlers  in  the  neighborhood  as  a  success 
ful  mountain-lion  hunter.  I  could  not  help  grinning  when 
I  found  out  that  they  did  not  even  allude  to  me  as  the  Vice- 
President-elect,  let  alone  as  a  hunter,  but  merely  as 
"  Johnny  Goff's  tourist. " 

Of  course  during  the  years  when  I  was  most  busy  at  se 
rious  work  I  could  do  no  hunting,  and  even  my  riding  was  of 
a  decorous  kind.  But  a  man  whose  business  is  sedentary 
should  get  some  kind  of  exercise  if  he  wishes  to  keep  himself 
in  as  good  physical  trim  as  his  brethren  who  do  manual 
labor.  When  I  worked  on  a  ranch,  I  needed  no  form  of 
exercise  except  my  work,  but  when  I  worked  in  an  office  the 
case  was  different.  A  couple  of  summers  I  played  polo 
with  some  of  my  neighbors.  I  shall  always  believe  we  played 
polo  in  just  the  right  way  for  middle-aged  men  with  stables 
of  the  general  utility  order.  Of  course  it  was  polo  which 
was  chiefly  of  interest  to  ourselves,  the  only  onlookers  being 
the  members  of  our  faithful  families.  My  two  ponies  were 
the  only  occupants  of  my  stable  except  a  cart-horse.  My 
wife  and  I  rode  and  drove  them,  and  they  were  used  for 
household  errands  and  for  the  children,  and  for  two  after 
noons  a  week  they  served  me  as  polo  ponies.  Polo  is  a  good 


40    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

game,  infinitely  better  for  vigorous  men  than  tennis  or  golf 
or  anything  of  that  kind.  There  is  all  the  fun  of  football, 
with  the  horse  thrown  in ;  and  if  only  people  would  be  willing 
to  play  it  in  simple  fashion  it  would  be  almost  as  much 
within  their  reach  as  golf.  But  at  Oyster  Bay  our  great 
and  permanent  amusements  were  rowing  and  sailing;  I 
do  not  care  for  the  latter,  and  am  fond  of  the  former.  I 
suppose  it  sounds  archaic,  but  I  cannot  help  thinking  that 
the  people  with  motor  boats  miss  a  great  deal.  If  they 
would  only  keep  to  rowboats  or  canoes,  and  use  oar  or  pad 
dle  themselves,  they  would  get  infinitely  more  benefit  than 
by  having  their  work  done  for  them  by  gasoline.  But  I 
rarely  took  exercise  merely  as  exercise.  Primarily  I  took  it 
because  I  liked  it.  Play  should  never  be  allowed  to  interfere 
with  work ;  and  a  life  devoted  merely  to  play  is,  of  all  forms 
of  existence,  the  most  dismal.  But  the  joy  of  life  is  a 
very  good  thing,  and  while  work  is  the  essential  in  it,  play 
also  has  its  place. 

When  obliged  to  live  in  cities,  I  for  a  long  time  found  that 
boxing  and  wrestling  enabled  me  to  get  a  good  deal  of  exer 
cise  in  condensed  and  attractive  form.  I  was  reluctantly 
obliged  to  abandon  both  as  I  grew  older.  I  dropped  the 
wrestling  earliest.  "When  I  became  Governor,  the  cham 
pion  middleweight  wrestler  of  America  happened  to  be  in 
Albany,  and  I  got  him  to  come  round  three  or  four  after 
noons  a  week.  Incidentally  I  may  mention  that  his  pres 
ence  caused  me  a  difficulty  with  the  Comptroller,  who 
refused  to  audit  a  bill  I  put  in  for  a  wrestling-mat,  explain 
ing  that  I  could  have  a  billiard-table,  billiards  being  recog 
nized  as  a  proper  Gubernatorial  amusement,  but  that  a 
wrestling-mat  symbolized  something  unusual  and  unheard 
of  and  could  not  be  permitted.  The  middleweight  cham 
pion  was  of  course  so  much  better  than  I  was  that  he  could 
not  only  take  care  of  himself  but  of  me  too  and  see  that  I 
was  not  hurt — for  wrestling  is  a  much  more  violent  amuse 
ment  than  boxing.  But  after  a  couple  of  months  he  had  to 
go  away,  and  he  left  as  a  substitute  a  good-humored,  stal 
wart  professional  oarsman.  The  oarsman  turned  out  to 


THE   VIGOR  OF   LIFE  41 

know  very  little  about  wrestling.  He  could  not  even  take 
care  of  himself,  not  to  speak  of  me.  By  the  end  of  our 
second  afternoon  one  of  his  long  ribs  had  been  caved  in  and 
two  of  my  short  ribs  badly  damaged,  and  my  left  shoulder- 
blade  so  nearly  shoved  out  of  place  that  it  creaked.  He 
was  nearly  as  pleased  as  I  was  when  I  told  him  I  thought 
we  would  "vote  the  war  a  failure"  and  abandon  wrestling. 
After  that  I  took  up  boxing  again.  While  President  I 
used  to  box  with  some  of  the  aides,  as  well  as  play  single 
stick  with  General  Wood.  After  a  few  years  I  had  to  aban 
don  boxing  as  well  as  wrestling,  for  in  one  bout  a  young 
captain  of  artillery  cross-countered  me  on  the  eye,  and  the 
blow  smashed  the  little  blood-vessels.  Fortunately  it  was 
my  left  eye,  but  the  sight  has  been  dim  ever  since,  and  if 
it  had  been  the  right  eye  I  should  have  been  entirely  unable 
to  shoot.  Accordingly  I  thought  it  better  to  acknowledge 
that  I  had  become  an  elderly  man  and  would  have  to  stop 
boxing.  I  then  took  up  jiu-jitsu  for  a  year  or  two. 

When  I  was  in  the  Legislature  and  was  working  very 
hard,  with  little  chance  of  getting  out  of  doors,  all  the  exer 
cise  I  got  was  boxing  and  wrestling.  A  young  fellow  turned 
up  who  was  a  second-rate  prize-fighter,  the  son  of  one  of  my 
old  boxing  teachers.  For  several  weeks  I  had  him  come 
round  to  my  rooms  in  the  morning  to  put  on  the  gloves  with 
me  for  half  an  -hour.  Then  he  suddenly  stopped,  and  some 
days  later  I  received  a  letter  of  woe  from  him  from  the 
jail.  I  found  that  he  was  by  profession  a  burglar,  and 
merely  followed  boxing  as  the  amusement  of  his  lighter 
moments,  or  when  business  was  slack. 

Naturally,  being  fond  of  boxing,  I  grew  to  know  a  good 
many  prize-fighters,  and  to  most  of  those  I  knew  I  grew 
genuinely  attached.  I  have  never  been  able  to  sympathize 
with  the  outcry  against  prize-fighters.  The  only  objection  I 
have  to  the  prize  ring  is  the  crookedness  that  has  attended 
its  commercial  development.  Outside  of  this  I  regard  box 
ing,  whether  professional  or  amateur,  as  a  first-class  sport, 
and  I  do  not  regard  it  as  brutalizing.  Of  course  matches  can 
be  conducted  under  conditions  that  make  them  brutalizing. 


42    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

But  this  is  true  of  football  games  and  of  most  other  rough 
and  vigorous  sports.  Most  certainly  prize-fighting  is  not 
half  as  brutalizing  or  demoralizing  as  many  forms  of  big 
business  and  of  the  legal  work  carried  on  in  connection  with 
big  business.  Powerful,  vigorous  men  of  strong  animal 
development  must  have  some  way  in  which  their  animal 
spirits  can  find  vent.  When  I  was  Police  Commissioner  I 
found  (and  Jacob  Eiis  will  back  me  up  in  this)  that  the 
establishment  of  a  boxing  club  in  a  tough  neighborhood 
always  tended  to  do  away  with  knifing  and  gun-fighting 
among  the  young  fellows  who  would  otherwise  have  been  in 
murderous  gangs.  Many  of  these  young  fellows  were  not 
naturally  criminals  at  all,  but  they  had  to  have  some  outlet 
for  their  .activities.  In  the  same  way  I  have  always  regarded 
boxing  as  a  first-class  sport  to  encourage  in  the  Young 
Men's  Christian  Association.  I  do  not  like  to  see  young 
Christians  with  shoulders  that  slope  like  a  champagne  bot 
tle.  Of  course  boxing  should  be  encouraged  in  the  army 
and  navy.  I  was  first  drawn  to  two  naval  chaplains, 
Fathers  Chidwick  and  Eainey,  by  finding  that  each  of  them 
had  bought  half  a  dozen  sets  of  boxing  gloves  and  encour 
aged  their  crews  in  boxing. 

When  I  was  Police  Commissioner,  I  heartily  approved 
the  effort  to  get  boxing  clubs  started  in  New  York  on  a 
clean  basis.  Later  I  was  reluctantly  obliged  to  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  prize  ring  had  become  hopelessly  de 
based  and  demoralized,  and  as  Governor  I  aided  in  the  pas 
sage  of  and  signed  the  bill  putting  a  stop  to  professional 
boxing  for  money.  This  was  because  some  of  the  prize 
fighters  themselves  were  crooked,  while  the  crowd  of  hang 
ers-on  who  attended  and  made  up  and  profited  by  the 
matches  had  placed  the  whole  business  on  a  basis  of  com 
mercialism  and  brutality  that  was  intolerable.  I  shall  al 
ways  maintain  that  boxing  contests  themselves  make  good, 
healthy  sport.  It  is  idle  to  compare  them  with  bull-fighting ; 
the  torture  and  death  of  the  wretched  horses  in  bull-fight 
ing  is  enough  of  itself  to  blast  the  sport,  no  matter  how 
great  the  skill  and  prowess  shown  by  the  bull-fighters.  Any 


THE    VIGOR   OF   LIFE  43 

sport  in  which  the  death  and  torture  of  animals  is  made  to 
furnish  pleasure  to  the  spectators  is  debasing.  There  should 
always  be  the  opportunity  provided  in  a  glove  fight  or  bare- 
fist  fight  to  stop  it  when  one  competitor  is  hopelessly  out 
classed  or  too  badly  hammered.  But  the  men  who  take  part 
in  these  fights  are  hard  as  nails,  and  it  is  not  worth  while 
to  feel  sentimental  about  their  receiving  punishment  which 
as  a  matter  of  fact  they  do  not  mind.  Of  course  the  men 
who  look  on  ought  to  be  able  to  stand  up  with  the  gloves, 
or  without  them,  themselves;  I  have  scant  use  for  the  type 
of  sportsmanship  which  consists  merely  in  looking  on  at  the 
feats  of  some  one  else. 

Some  as  good  citizens  as  I  know  are  or  were  prize-fighters. 
Take  Mike  Donovan,  of  New  York.  He  and  his  family  rep 
resent  a  type  of  American  citizenship  of  which  we  have  a 
right  to  be  proud.  Mike  is  a  devoted  temperance  man,  and 
can  be  relied  upon  for  every  movement  in  the  interest  of 
good  citizenship.  I  was  first  intimately  thrown  with  him 
when  I  was  Police  Commissioner.  One  evening  he  and  I — 
both  in  dress  suits — attended  a  temperance  meeting  of 
Catholic  societies.  It  culminated  in  a  lively  set-to  between 
myself  and  a  Tammany  Senator  who  was  a  very  good  fel 
low,  but  whose  ideas  of  temperance  differed  radically  from 
mine,  and,  as  the  event  proved,  from  those  of  the  majority 
of  the  meeting.  Mike  evidently  regarded  himself  as  my 
backer — he  was  sitting  on  the  platform  beside  me — and  I 
think  felt  as  pleased  and  interested  as  if  the  set-to  had  been 
physical  instead  of  merely  verbal.  Afterwards  I  grew  to 
know  him  well  both  while  I  was  Governor  and  while  I  was 
President,  and  many  a  time  he  came  on  and  boxed  with  me. 

Battling  Nelson  was  another  stanch  friend,  and  he  and  I 
think  alike  on  most  questions  of  political  and  industrial  life ; 
although,  he  once  expressed  to  me  some  commiseration  be 
cause,  as  President,  I  did  not  get  anything  like  the  money 
return  for  my  services  that  he  aggregated  during  the  same 
term  of  years  in  the  ring.  Bob  Fitzsimmons  was  another 
good  friend  of  mine.  He  has  never  forgotten  his  early  skill 
as  a  blacksmith,  and  among  the  things  that  I  value  and  al- 


44    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ways  keep  in  use  is  a  penholder  made  by  Bob  out  of  a  horse 
shoe,  with  an  inscription  saying  that  it  is  "Made  for  and 
presented  to  President  Theodore  Eoosevelt  by  his  friend 
and  admirer,  Robert  Fitzsimmons. ' '  I  have  for  a  long  time 
had  the  friendship  of  John  L.  Sullivan,  than  whom  in  his 
prime  no  better  man  ever  stepped  into  the  ring.  He  is  now 
a  Massachusetts  farmer.  John  used  occasionally  to  visit 
me  at  the  White  House,  his  advent  always  causing  a  distinct 
flutter  among  the  waiting  Senators  and  Congressmen. 
When  I  went  to  Africa  he  presented  me  with  a  gold-mounted 
rabbit 's  foot  for  luck.  I  carried  it  through  my  African  trip ; 
and  I  certainly  had  good  luck. 

On  one  occasion  one  of  my  prize-fighting  friends  called 
on  me  at  the  White  House  on  business.  He  explained  that 
he  wished  to  see  me  alone,  sat  down  opposite  me,  and  put 
a  very  expensive  cigar  on  the  desk,  saying,  "Have  a  cigar." 
I  thanked  him  and  said  I  did  not  smoke,  to  which  he  re 
sponded,  "Put  it  in  your  pocket."  He  then  added,  "Take 
another ;  put  both  in  your  pocket."  This  I  accordingly  did. 
Having  thus  shown  at  the  outset  the  necessary  formal 
courtesy,  my  visitor,  an  old  and  valued  friend,  proceeded  to 
explain  that  a  nephew  of  his  had  enlisted  in  the  Marine 
Corps,  but  had  been  absent  without  leave,  and  was  threat 
ened  with  dishonorable  discharge  on  the  ground  of  deser 
tion.  My  visitor,  a  good  citizen  and  a  patriotic  American, 
was  stung  to  the  quick  at  the  thought  of  such  an  incident  oc 
curring  in  his  family,  and  he  explained  to  me  that  it  must 
not  occur,  that  there  must  not  be  the  disgrace  to  the  fam 
ily,  although  he  would  be  delighted  to  have  the  offender 
"handled  rough"  to  teach  him  a  needed  lesson;  he  added 
that  he  wished  I  would  take  him  and  handle  him  myself,  for 
he  knew  that  I  would  see  that  he  "got  all  that  was  coming 
to  him."  Then  a  look  of  pathos  came  into  his  eyes,  and  he 
explained:  "That  boy  I  just  cannot  understand.  He  was 
my  sister's  favorite  son,  and  I  always  took  a  special  interest 
in  him  myself.  I  did  my  best  to  bring  him  up  the  way  he 
ought  to  go.  But  there  was  just  nothing  to  be  done  with 
him.  His  tastes  were  naturallv  low.  He  took  to  music!" 


THE    VIGOE   OF   LIFE  45 

What  form  this  debasing  taste  for  music  assumed  I  did  not 
inquire;  and  I  was  able  to  grant  my  friend's  wish. 

While  in  the  White  House  I  always  tried  to  get  a  couple 
of  hours'  exercise  in  the  afternoons — sometimes  tennis, 
more  often  riding,  or  else  a  rough  cross-country  walk,  per 
haps  down  Eock  Creek,  which  was  then  as  wild  as  a  stream 
in  the  White  Mountains,  or  on  the  Virginia  side  along  the 
Potomac.  My  companions  at  tennis  or  on  these  rides  and 
walks  we  gradually  grew  -to  style  the  Tennis  Cabinet ;  and 
then  we  extended  the  term  to  take  in  many  of  my  old-time 
Western  friends  such  as  Ben  Daniels,  Seth  Bullock,  Luther 
Kelly,  and  others  who  had  taken  part  with  me  in  more  se 
rious  outdoor  adventures  than  walking  and  riding  for 
pleasure.  Most  of  the  men  who  were  oftenest  with  me  on 
these  trips — men  like  Major- General  Leonard  Wood;  or 
Major-General  Thomas  Henry  Barry;  or  Presley  Marion 
Kixey,  Surgeon-General  of  the  Navy ;  or  Eobert  Bacon,  who 
was  afterwards  Secretary  of  State ;  or  James  Garfield,  who 
was  Secretary  of  the  Interior ;  or  Giff ord  Pinchot,  who  was 
chief  of  the  Forest  Service — were  better  men  physically 
than  I  was ;  but  I  could  ride  and  walk  well  enough  for  us  all 
thoroughly  to  enjoy  it.  Often,  especially  in  the  winters  and 
early  springs,  we  would  arrange  for  a  point  to  point  walk, 
not  turning  aside  for  anything — for  instance,  swimming 
Eock  Creek  or  even  the  Potomac  if  it  came  in  our  way.  Of 
course  under  such  circumstances  we  had  to  arrange  that 
our  return  to  Washington  should  be  when  it  was  dark,  so 
that  our  appearance  might  scandalize  no  one.  On  several 
occasions  we  thus  swam  Eock  Creek  in  the  early  spring 
when  the  ice  was  floating  thick  upon  it.  If  we  swam  the 
Potomac,  we  usually  took  off  our  clothes.  I  remember  one 
such  occasion  when  the  French  Ambassador,  Jusserand, 
who  was  a  member  of  the  Tennis  Cabinet,  was  along,  and, 
just  as  we  wrere  about  to  get  in  to  swim,  somebody  said, 
"Mr.  Ambassador,  Mr.  Ambassador,  you  haven't  taken  off 
your  gloves,"  to  which  he  promptly  responded,  "I  think  I 
will  leave  them  on;  we  might  meet  ladies!" 

We  liked  Eock  Creek  for  these  walks  because  we  could  do 


46    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

so  much  scrambling  and  climbing  along  the  cliffs ;  there  was 
almost  as  much  climbing  when  we  walked  down  the  Potomac 
to  Washington  from  the  Virginia  end  of  the  Chain  Bridge. 
I  would  occasionally  take  some  big-game  friend  from 
abroad,  Selous  or  St.  George  Littledale  or  Captain  Bad- 
elyffe  or  Paul  Niedicke,  on  these  walks.  Once  I  invited  an 
entire  class  of  officers  who  were  attending  lectures  at  the 
War  College  to  come  on  one  of  these  walks ;  I  chose  a  route 
which  gave  us  the  hardest  climbing  along  the  rocks  and  the 
deepest  crossings  of  the  creek;  and  my  army  friends  en 
joyed  it  hugely — being  the  right  sort,  to  a  man. 

On  March  1,  1909,  three  days  before  leaving  the  Presi 
dency,  various  members  of  the  Tennis  Cabinet  lunched 
with  me  at  the  White  House.  "Tennis  Cabinet "  was  an 
elastic  term,  and  of  course  many  who  ought  to  have  been 
at  the  lunch  were,  for  one  reason  or  another,  away  from 
Washington;  but,  to  make  up  for  this,  a  goodly  number  of 
out-of-town  honorary  members,  so  to  speak,  were  present 
— for  instance,  Seth  Bullock;  Luther  Kelly,  better  known 
as  Yellowstone  Kelly  in  the  days  when  he  was  an  army 
scout  against  the  Sioux;  and  Abernathy,  the  wolf-hunter. 
At  the  end  of  the  lunch  Seth  Bullock  suddenly  reached  for 
ward,  swept  aside  a  mass  of  flowers  which  made  a  center 
piece  on  the  table,  and  revealed  a  bronze  cougar  by  Proctor, 
which  was  a  parting  gift  to  me.  The  lunch  party  and  the 
cougar  were  then  photographed  on  the  lawn. 

Some  of  the  younger  officers  who  were  my  constant  com 
panions  on  these  walks  and  rides  pointed  out  to  me  the  con 
dition  of  utter  physical  worthlessness  into  which  certain  of 
the  elder  ones  had  permitted  themselves  to  lapse,  and  the 
very  bad  effect  this  would  certainly  have  if  ever  the  army 
were  called  into  service.  I  then  looked  into  the  matter  for 
myself,  and  was  really  shocked  at  what  I  found.  Many 
of  the  older  officers  were  so  unfit  physically  that  their  con 
dition  would  have  excited  laughter,  had  it  not  been  so  se 
rious,  to  think  that  they  belonged  to  the  military  arm  of  the 
Government.  A  cavalry  colonel  proved  unable  to  keep  his 
horse  at  a  smart  trot  for  even  half  a  mile,  when  I  visited 


THE    VIGOR    OF    LIFE  47 

his  post;  a  Major- General  proved  afraid  even  to  let  his 
horse  canter,  when  he  went  on  a  ride  with  us ;  and  certain 
otherwise  good  men  proved  as  unable  to  walk  as  if  they  had 
been  sedentary  brokers.  I  consulted  with  men  like  Major- 
Generals  Wood  and  Bell,  who  were  themselves  of  fine  phy 
sique,  with  bodies  fit  to  meet  any  demand.  It  was  late  in 
my  administration ;  and  we  deemed  it  best  only  to  make  a 
beginning — experience  teaches  the  most  inveterate  reformer 
how  hard  it  is  to  get  a  totally  non-military  nation  to  accept 
seriously  any  military  improvement.  Accordingly,  I  merely 
issued  directions  that  each  officer  should  prove  his  ability 
to  walk  fifty  miles,  or  ride  one  hundred,  in  three  days. 
This  is,  of  course,  a  test  which  many  a  healthy  middle- 
aged  woman  would  be  able  to  meet.  But  a  large  portion  of 
the  press  adopted  the  view  that  it  was  a  bit  of  capricious 
tyranny  on  my  part ;  and  a  considerable  number  of  elderly 
officers,  with  desk  rather  than  field  experience,  intrigued 
with  their  friends  in  Congress  to  have  the  order  annulled. 
So  one  day  I  took  a  ride  of  a  little  over  one  hundred  miles 
myself,  in  company  with  Surgeon-General  Eixey  and  two 
other  officers.  The  Virginia  roads  were  frozen  and  in  ruts, 
and  in  the  afternoon  and  evening  there  was  a  storm  of  snow 
and  sleet ;  and  when  it  had  been  thus  experimentally  shown, 
under  unfavorable  conditions,  how  easy  it  was  to  do  in  one 
day  the  task  for  which  the  army  officers  were  allowed  three 
days,  all  open  objection  ceased.  But  some  bureau  chiefs 
still  did  as  much  underhanded  work  against  the  order  as 
they  dared,  and  it  was  often  difficult  to  reach  them.  In  the 
Marine  Corps  Captain  Leonard,  who  had  lost  an  arm  at 
Tientsin,  with  two  of  his  lieutenants  did  the  fifty  miles  in 
one  day;  for  they  were  vigorous  young  men,  who  laughed 
at  the  idea  of  treating  a  fifty-mile  walk  as  over-fatiguing. 
Well,  the  Navy  Department  officials  rebuked  them,  and 
made  them  take  the  walk  over  again  in  three  days,  on  the 
ground  that  taking  it  in  one  day  did  not  comply  with  the 
regulations !  This  seems  unbelievable ;  but  Leonard  assures 
me  it  is  true.  'He  did  not  inform  me  at  the  time,  being 
afraid  to  "get  in  wrong"  with  his  permanent  superiors. 


48    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

If  I  had  known  of  the  order,  short  work  would  have  been 
made  of  the  bureaucrat  who  issued  it.1 

i  One  of  our  best  naval  officers  sent  me  the  following  letter,  after  the 
above  had  appeared: — 

"I  note  in  your  Autobiography  now  being  published  in  the  Outlook  that 
you  refer  to  the  reasons  which  led  you  to  establish  a  physical  test  for  the 
Army,  and  to  the  action  you  took  (your  100-mile  ride)  to  prevent  the  test 
being  abolished.  Doubtless  you  did  not  know  the  following  facts: 

"1.  The  first  annual  navy  test  of  50  miles  in  three  days  was  subsequently 
reduced  to  25  miles  in  two  days  in  each  quarter. 

"2.  This  was  further  reduced  to  10  miles  each  month,  which  is  the  present 
'test/  and  there  is  danger  lest  even  this  utterly  insufficient  test  be  abolished. 

"I  enclose  a  copy  of  a  recent  letter  to  the  Surgeon  General  which  will 
show  our  present  deplorable  condition  and  the  worse  condition  into  which  we 
are  slipping  back. 

"The  original  test  of  50  miles  in  three  days  did  a  very  great  deal  of  good. 
It  decreased  by  thousands  of  dollars  the  money  expended  on  street  car  fare, 
and  by  a  much  greater  sum  the  amount  expended  over  the  bar.  It  eliminated 
a  number  of  the  wholly  unfit;  it  taught  officers  to  walk;  it  forced  them  to 
learn  the  care  of  their  feet  and  that  of  their  men;  and  it  improved  their 
general  health  and  was  rapidly  forming  a  taste  for  physical  exercise." 

The  enclosed  letter  ran  in  part  as  follows: — 

"I  am  returning  under  separate  cover  'The  Soldiers'  Foot  and  the  Military 
Shoe/ 

"The  book  contains  knowledge  of  a  practical  character  that  is  valuable 
for  the  men  who  HAVE  TO  MARCH,  WHO  HAVE  SUFFERED  FROM 
FOOT  TROUBLES,  AND  WHO  MUST  AVOID  THEM  IN  ORDER  TO  AT 
TAIN  EFFICIENCY. 

"The  words  in  capitals  express,  according  to  my  idea,  the  gist  of  the  whole 
matter  as  regards  military  men. 

"The  army  officer  whose  men  break  down  on  test  gets  a  black  eye.  The  one 
whose  men  show  efficiency  in  this  respect  gets  a  bouquet. 

"To  such  men  the  book  is  invaluable.  There  is  no  danger  that  they  will 
neglect  it.  They  will  actually  learn  it,  for  exactly  the  same  reasons  that  our 
fellows  learn  the  gunnery  instructions — or  did  learn  them  before  they  were 
withdrawn  and  burned. 

"B  U  T,  I  have  not  been  able  to  interest  a  single  naval  officer  in  this  fine 
book.  They  will  look  at  the  pictures  and  say  it  is  a  good  book,  but  they  won't 
read  it.  The  marine  officers,  on  the  contrary,  are  very  much  interested,  be 
cause  they  have  to  teach  their  men  to  care  for  their  feet  and  they  must  know 
how  to  care  for  their  own.  But  the  naval  officers  feel  no  such  necessity,  simply 
because  their  men  do  not  have  to  demonstrate  their  efficiency  by  practice 
marches,  and  they  themselves  do  not  have  to  do  a  stunt  that  will  show  up 
their  own  ignorance  and  inefficiency  in  the  matter. 

"For  example,  some  time  ago  I  was  talking  with  some  chaps  about  shoes — 
the  necessity  of  having  them  long  enough  and  wide  enough,  etc.,  and  one  of 
them  said:  'I  have  no  use  for  such  shoes,  as  I  never  walk  except  when  I  have 
to,  and  any  old  shoes  do  for  the  10-mile-a-month  stunt/  so  there  you  are! 

"When  the  first  test  was  ordered,  Edmonston  (Washington  shoe  man)  told 
me  that  he  sold  more  real  walking  shoes  to  naval  officers  in  three  months  than 
he  had  in  the  three  preceding  years.  I  know  three  officers  who  lost  both  big-toe 
nails  after  the  first  te«t,  and  another  who  walked  nine  miles  in  practice  with 


THE   VIGOR   OF   LIFE  49 

In  no  country  with  an  army  worth  calling  such  is  there  a 
chance  for  a  man  physically  unfit  to  stay  in  the  service. 

a  pair  of  heavy  walking  shoes  that  were  too  small  and  was  laid  up  for  three 
days — could  not  come  to  the  office.  I  know  plenty  of  men  who  after  the  first 
test  had  to  borrow  shoes  from  larger  men  until  their  feet  'went  down'  to  their 
normal  size. 

"This  test  may  have  been  a  bit  too  strenuous  for  old  hearts  (of  men  who 
had  never  taken  any  exercise ) ,  but  it  was  excellent  as  a  matter  of  instruction 
and  training  of  handling  feet — and  in  an  emergency  (such  as  we  soon  may 
have  in  Mexico)  sound  hearts  are  not  much  good  if  the  feet  won't  stand. 

"However,  the  25-mile  test  in  two  days  each  quarter  answered  the  same 
purpose,  for  the  reason  that  12 J/£  miles  will  produce  sore  feet  with  bad  shoes, 
and  sore  feet  and  lame  muscles  even  with  good  shoes,  if  there  has  been  no 
practice  marching. 

"It  was  the  necessity  of  doing  12^  MORE  MILES  ON  THE  SECOND 
DAY  WITH  SORE  FEET  AND  LAME  MUSCLES  that  made  'em  sit  up  and 
take  notice — made  'em  practice  walking,  made  'em  avoid  street  cars,  buy 
proper  shoes,  show  some  curiosity  about  sox  and  the  care  of  the  feet  in 
general. 

"All  this  passed  out  with  the  introduction  of  the  last  test  of  10  miles  a 
month.  As  one  fellow  said:  'I  can  do  that  in  sneakers' — but  he  couldn't  if 
the  second  day  involved  a  tramp  on  the  sore  feet. 

"The  point  is  that  whereas  formerly  officers  had  to  practice  walking  a 
bit  and  give  some  attention  to  proper  footgear,  now  they  don't  have  to,  and 
the  natural  consequence  is  that  they  don't  do  it. 

"There  are  plenty  of  officers  who  do  not  walk  any  more  than  is  necessary 
to  reach  a  street  car  that  will  carry  them  from  their  residences  to  their  offices. 
Some  who  have  motors  do  not  do  so  much.  They  take  no  exercise.  They  take 
cocktails  instead  and  are  getting  beefy  and  'ponchy,'  and  something  should  be 
done  to  remedy  this  state  of  affairs. 

"It  would  not  be  necessary  if  service  opinion  required  officers  so  to  order 
their  lives  that  it  would  be  common  knowledge  that  they  were  'hard,'  in  order 
to  avoid  the  danger  of  being  selected  out. 

"We  have  no  such  service  opinion,  and  it  is  not  in  process  of  formation. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  known  that  the  'Principal  Dignitaries'  unanimously 
advised  the  Secretary  to  abandon  all  physical  tests.  He,  a  civilian,  was  wise 
enough  not  to  take  the  advice. 

"I  would  like  to  see  a  test  established  that  would  oblige  officers  to  take 
sufficient  exercise  to  pass  it  without  inconvenience.  For  the  reasons  given 
above,  20  miles  in  two  days  every  other  month  would  do  the  business,  while 
10  miles  each  month  does  not  touch  it,  simply  because  nobody  has  to  walk 
on  'next  day'  feet.  As  for  the  proposed  test  of  so  many  hours  'exercise'  a  week, 
the  flat  foots  of  the  pendulous  belly  muscles  are  delighted.  They  are  looking 
into  the  question  of  pedometers,  and  will  hang  one  of  these  on  their  wheezy 
chests  and  let  it  count  every  shuffling  step  they  take  out  of  doors. 

"If  we  had  an  adequate  test  throughout  20  years,  there  would  at  the  end 
of  that  time  be  few  if  any  sacks  of  blubber  at  the  upper  end  of  the  list;  and 
service  opinion  against  that  sort  of  thing  would  be  established." 

These  tests  were  kept  during  my  administration.  They  were  afterwards 
abandoned;  not  through  perversity  or  viciousness,  but  through  weakness,  and 
inability  to  understand  the  need  of  preparedness  in  advance,  if  the  emergencies 
of  war  are  to  be  properly  met,  when,  or  if,  they  arrive. 


50    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT- AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Our  countrymen  should  understand  that  every  army  officer 
— and  every  marine  officer — ought  to  be  summarily  removed 
from  the  service  unless  he  is  able  to  undergo  far  severer 
tests  than  those  which,  as  a  beginning,  I  imposed.  To  fol 
low  any  other  course  is  to  put  a  premium  on  slothful  in 
capacity,  and  to  do  the  gravest  wrong  to  the  Nation. 

I  have  mentioned  all  these  experiences,  and  I  could  men 
tion  scores  of  others,  because  out  of  them  grew  my  philos 
ophy — perhaps  they  were  in  part  caused  by  my  philosophy 
— of  bodily  vigor  as  a  method  of  getting  that  vigor  of 
soul  without  which  vigor  of  the  body  counts  for  nothing. 
The  dweller  in  cities  has  less  chance  than  the  dweller  in  the 
country  to  keep  his  body  sound  and  vigorous.  But  he  can 
do  so,  if  only  he  will  take  the  trouble.  Any  young  lawyer, 
shopkeeper,  or  clerk,  or  shop-assistant  can  keep  himself  in 
good  condition  if  he  tries.  Some  of  the  best  men  who  have 
ever  served  under  me  in  the  National  Guard  and  in  my  regi 
ment  were  former  clerks  or  floor- walkers.  Why,  Johnny 
Hayes,  the  Marathon  victor,  and  at  one  time  world  cham 
pion,  one  of  my  valued  friends  and  supporters,  was  a  floor 
walker  in  Bloomingdale  ?s  big  department  store.  Surely 
with  Johnny  Hayes  as  an  example,  any  young  man  in  a 
city  can  hope  to  make  his  body  all  that  a  vigorous  man's 
body  should  be. 

I  once  made  a  speech  to  which  I  gave  the  title  "The 
Strenuous  Life."  Afterwards  I  published  a  volume  of 
essays  with  this  for  a  title.  There  were  two  translations  of 
it  which  always  especially  pleased  me.  One  was  by  a 
Japanese  officer  who  knew  English  well,  and  who  had  car 
ried  the  essay  all  through  the  Manchurian  campaign,  and 
later  translated  it  for  the  benefit  of  his  countrymen.  The 
other  was  by  an  Italian  lady,  whose  brother,  an  officer  in 
the  Italian  army  who  had  died  on  duty  in  a  foreign  land, 
had  also  greatly  liked  the  article  and  carried  it  round  with 
him.  In  translating  the  title  the  lady  rendered  it  in  Italian 
as  Vigor  di  Vita.  I  thought  this  translation  a  great  im 
provement  on  the  original,  and  have  always  wished  that  I 
had  myself  used  "The  Vigor  of  Life"  as  a  heading  to  indi- 


THE   VIGOR   OF  LIFE  51 

cate  what  I  was  trying  to  preach,  instead  of  the  heading  I 
actually  did  use. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  success,  or  rather  two  kinds  of 
ability  displayed  in  the  achievement  of  success.  There  is, 
first,  the  success  either  in  big  things  or  small  things  which 
comes  to  the  man  who  has  in  him  the  natural  power  to  do 
what  no  one  else  can  do,  and  what  no  amount  of  training, 
no  perseverance  or  will  power,  will  enable  any  ordinary 
man  to  do.  This  success,  of  course,  like  every  other  kind 
of  success,  may  be  on  a  very  big  scale  or  on  a  small  scale. 
The  quality  which  the  man  possesses  may  be  that  which 
enables  him  to  run  a  hundred  yards  in  nine  and  three-fifths 
seconds,  or  to  play  ten  separate  games  of  chess  at  the  same 
time  blindfolded,  or  to  add  five  columns  of  figures  at  once 
without  effort,  or  to  write  the  "Ode  to  a  Grecian  Urn,"  or 
to  deliver  the  Gettysburg  speech,  or  to  show  the  ability  of 
Frederick  at  Leuthen  or  Nelson  at  Trafalgar.  No  amount 
of  training  of  body  or  mind  would  enable  any  good  ordinary 
man  to  perform  any  one  of  these  feats.  Of  course  the 
proper  performance  of  each  implies  much  previous  study 
or  training,  but  in  no  one  of  them  is  success  to  be  attained 
save  by  the  altogether  exceptional  man  who  has  in  him  the 
something  additional  which  the  ordinary  man  does  not 
have. 

This  is  the  most  striking  kind  of  success,  and  it  can  be 
attained  only  by  the  man  who  has  in  him  the  quality  which 
separates  him  in  kind  no  less  than  in  degree  from  his  fel 
lows.  But  much  the  commoner  type  of  success  in  every 
walk  of  life  and  in  every  species  of  effort  is  that  which 
comes  to  the  man  who  differs  from  his  fellows  not  by  the 
kind  of  quality  which  he  possesses  but  by  the  degree  of  de 
velopment  which  he  has  given  that  quality.  This  kind  of 
success  is  open  to  a  large  number  of  persons,  if  only  they 
seriously  determine  to  achieve  it.  It  is  the  kind  of  success 
which  is  open  to  the  average  man  of  sound  body  and  fair 
mind,  who  has  no  remarkable  mental  or  physical  attributes, 
but  who  gets  just  as  much  as  possible  in  the  way  of  work  out 
of  the  aptitudes  that  he  does  possess.  It  is  the  only  kind  of 


52    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

success  that  is  open  to  most  of  us.  Yet  some  of  the  greatest 
successes  in  history  have  been  those  of  this  second  class — 
when  I  call  it  second  class  I  am  not  running  it  down  in  the 
least,  I  am  merely  pointing  out  that  it  differs  in  kind  from 
the  first  class.  To  the  average  man  it  is  probably  more  use 
ful  to  study  this  second  type  of  success  than  to  study  the 
first.  From  the  study  of  the  first  he  can  learn  inspiration, 
he  can  get  uplift  and  lofty  enthusiasm.  From  the  study  of 
the  second  he  can,  if  he  chooses,  find  out  how  to  win  a  simi 
lar  success  himself. 

I  need  hardly  say  that  all  the  successes  I  have  ever  won 
have  been  of  the  second  type.  I  never  won  anything  with 
out  hard  labor  and  the  exercise  of  my  best  judgment  and 
careful  planning  and  working  long  in  advance.  Having 
been  a  rather  sickly  and  awkward  boy,  I  was  as  a  young 
man  at  first  both  nervous  and  distrustful  of  my  own  prow 
ess.  I  had  to  train  myself  painfully  and  laboriously  not 
merely  as  regards  my  body  but  as  regards  my  soul  and 
spirit. 

When  a  boy  I  read  a  passage  in  one  of  Marryat's  books 
which  always  impressed  me.  In  this  passage  the  captain 
of  some  small  British  man-of-war  is  explaining  to  the  hero 
how  to  acquire  the  quality  of  fearlessness.  He  says  that  at 
the  outset  almost  every  man  is  frightened  when  he  goes  into 
action,  but  that  the  course  to  follow  is  for  the  man  to  keep 
such  a  grip  on  himself  that  he  can  act  just  as  if  he  was  not 
frightened.  After  this  is  kept  up  long  enough  it  changes 
from  pretense  to  reality,  and  the  man  does  in  very  fact  be 
come  fearless  by  sheer  dint  of  practicing  fearlessness  when 
he  does  not  feel  it.  (I  am  using  my  own  language,  not 
Marryat  's. )  This  was  the  theory  upon  which  I  went.  There 
were  all  kinds  of  things  of  which  I  was  afraid  at  first,  rang 
ing  from  grizzly  bears  to  "mean"  horses  and  gun-fighters ; 
but  by  acting  as  if  I  was  not  afraid  I  gradually  ceased  to  be 
afraid.  Most  men  can  have  the  same  experience  if  they 
choose.  They  will  first  learn  to  bear  themselves  well  in 
trials  which  they  anticipate  and  which  they  school  them 
selves  in  advance  to  meet.  After  a  while  the  habit  will 


THE   VIGOR   OF   LIFE  53 

grow  on  them,  and  they  will  behave  well  in  sudden  and  un 
expected  emergencies  which  come  upon  them  unawares. 

It  is  of  course  much  pleasanter  if  one  is  naturally  fear 
less,  and  I  envy  and  respect  the  men  who  are  naturally  fear 
less.  But  it  is  a  good  thing  to  remember  that  the  man  who 
does  not  enjoy  this  advantage  can  nevertheless  stand  beside 
the  man  who  does,  and  can  do  his  duty  with  the  like  effi 
ciency,  if  he  chooses  to.  Of  course  he  must  not  let  his 
desire  take  the  form  merely  of  a  day-dream.  Let  him 
dream  about  being  a  fearless  man,  and  the  more  he  dreams 
the  better  he  will  be,  always  provided  he  does  his  best  to 
realize  the  dream  in  practice.  He  can  do  his  part  honorably 
and  well  provided  only  he  sets  fearlessness  before  himself 
as  an  ideal,  schools  himself  to  think  of  danger  merely  as 
something  to  be  faced  and  overcome,  and  regards  life  itself 
as  he  should  regard  it,  not  as  something  to  be  thrown  away, 
but  as  a  pawn  to  be  promptly  hazarded  whenever  the  hazard 
is  warranted  by  the  larger  interests  of  the  great  game  in 
which  we  are  all  engaged. 


,CHAPTEK  ni 

PRACTICAL,  POLITICS 

WHEN  I  left  Harvard,  I  took  up  the  study  of  law.  If  I  had 
been  sufficiently  fortunate  to  come  under  Professor  Thayer, 
of  the  Harvard  Law  School,  it  may  well  be  that  I  would  have 
realized  that  the  lawyer  can  do  a  great  work  for  justice  and 
against  legalism. 

But,  doubtless  chiefly  through  my  own  fault,  some  of 
the  teaching  of  the  law  books  and  of  the  classroom  seemed 
to  me  to  be  against  justice.  The  caveat  emptor  side  of  the 
law,  like  the  caveat  emptor  side  of  business,  seemed  to  me 
repellent;  it  did  not  make  for  social  fair  dealing.  The 
6 'let  the  buyer  beware"  maxim,  when  translated  into  actual 
practice,  whether  in  law  or  business,  tends  to  translate  itself 
further  into  the  seller  making  his  profit  at  the  expense  of 
the  buyer,  instead  of  by  a  bargain  which  shall  be  to  the 
profit  of  both.  It  did  not  seem  to  me  that  the  law  was 
framed  to  discourage  as  it  should  sharp  practice,  and  all 
other  kinds  of  bargains  except  those  which  are  fair  and  of 
benefit  to  both  sides.  I  was  young;  there  was  much  in  the 
judgment  which  I  then  formed  on  this  matter  which  I  should 
now  revise ;  but,  then  as  now,  many  of  the  big  corporation 
lawyers,  to  whom  the  ordinary  members  of  the  bar  then  as 
now  looked  up,  held  certain  standards  which  were  difficult 
to  recognize  as  compatible  with  the  idealism  I  suppose 
every  high-minded  young  man  is  apt  to  feel.  If  I  had  been 
obliged  to  earn  every  cent  I  spent,  I  should  have  gone  whole 
heartedly  into  the  business  of  making  both  ends  meet,  and 
should  have  taken  up  the  law  or  any  other  respectable 
occupation — for  I  then  held,  and  now  hold,  the  belief  that 
a  man's  first  duty  is  to  pull  his  own  weight  and  to  take  care 
of  those  dependent  upon  him ;  and  I  then  believed,  and  now 

54 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  55 

believe,  that  the  greatest  privilege  and  greatest  duty  for 
any  man  is  to  be  happily  married,  and  that  no  other  form 
of  success  or  service,  for  either  man  or  woman,  can  be 
wisely  accepted  as  a  substitute  or  alternative.  But  it  hap 
pened  that  I  had  been  left  enough  money  by  my  father  not 
to  make  it  necessary  for  me  to  think  solely  of  earning  bread 
for  myself  and  my  family.  I  had  enough  to  get  bread.  What 
I  had  to  do,  if  I  wanted  butter  and  jam,  was  to  provide  the 
butter  and  jam,  but  to  count  their  cost  as  compared  with 
other  things.  In  other  words,  I  made  up  my  mind  that, 
while  I  must  earn  money,  I  could  afford  to  make  earning 
money  the  secondary  instead  of  the  primary  object  of  my 
career.  If  I  had  had  no  money  at  all,  then  my  first  duty 
would  have  been  to  earn  it  in  any  honest  fashion.  As  I  had 
some  money  I  felt  that  my  need  for  more  money  was  to  be 
treated  as  a  secondary  need,  and  that  while  it  was  my  busi 
ness  to  make  more  money  where  I  legitimately  and  properly 
could,  yet  that  it  was  also  my  business  to  treat  other  kinds 
of  work  as  more  important  than  money-making. 

Almost  immediately  after  leaving  Harvard  in  1880  I  be 
gan  to  take  an  interest  in  politics.  I  did  not  then  believe, 
and  I  do  not  now  believe,  that  any  man  should  ever  attempt 
to  make  politics  his  only  career.  It  is  a  dreadful  misfortune 
for  a  man  to  grow  to  feel  that  his  whole  livelihood  and 
whole  happiness  depend  upon  his  staying  in  office.  Such  a 
feeling  prevents  him  from  being  of  real  service  to  the  people 
while  in  office,  and  always  puts  him  under  the  heaviest 
strain  of  pressure  to  barter  his  convictions  for  the  sake  of 
holding  office.  A  man  should  have  some  other  occupation 
— I  had  several  other  occupations — to  which  he  can  resort 
if  at  any  time  he  is  thrown  out  of  office,  or  if  at  any  time  he 
finds  it  necessary  to  choose  a  course  which  will  probably 
result  in  his  being  thrown  out,  unless  he  is  willing  to  stay  in 
at  cost  to  his  conscience. 

At  that  day,  in  1880,  a  young  man  of  my  bringing  up 
and  convictions  could  join  only  the  Eepublican  party,  and 
join  it  I  accordingly  did.  It  was  no  simple  thing  to  join 
it  then.  That  was  long  before  the  era  of  ballot  reform  and 


56    THEODORE    ROOSEY7ELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

the  control  of  primaries ;  long  before  the  era  when  we  real 
ized  that  the  Government  must  take  official  notice  of  the 
deeds  and  acts  of  party  organizations.  The  party  was  still 
treated  as  a  private  corporation,  and  in  each  district  the 
organization  formed  a  kind  of  social  and  political  club.  A 
man  had  to  be  regularly  proposed  for  and  elected  into  this 
club,  just  as  into  any  other  club.  As  a  friend  of  mine  pic 
turesquely  phrased  it,  I  "had  to  break  into  the  organization 
with  a  jimmy.'' 

Under  these  circumstances  there  was  some  difficulty  in 
joining  the  local  organization,  and  considerable  amusement 
and  excitement  to  be  obtained  out  of  it  after  I  had  joined. 

It  was  over  thirty-three  years  ago  that  I  thus  became  a 
member  of  the  Twenty-first  District  Republican  Association 
in  the  city  of  New  York.  The  men  I  knew  best  were  the 
men  in  the  clubs  of  social  pretension  and  the  men  of  culti 
vated  taste  and  easy  life.  When  I  began  to  make  inquiries 
as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the  local  Eepublican  Association 
and  the  means  of  joining  it,  these  men — and  the  big  business 
men  and  lawyers  also — laughed  at  me,  and  told  me  that 
politics  were  "low";  that  the  organizations  were  not  con 
trolled  by  "gentlemen";  that  I  would  find  them  run  by 
saloon-keepers,  horse-car  conductors,  and  the  like,  and  not 
by  men  with  any  of  whom  I  would  come  in  contact  outside ; 
and,  moreover,  they  assured  me  that  the  men  I  met  would  be 
rough  and  brutal  and  unpleasant  to  deal  with.  I  answered 
that  if  this  were  so  it  merely  meant  that  the  people  I  knew 
did  not  belong  to  the  governing  class,  and  that  the  other 
people  did — and  that  I  intended  to  be  one  of  the  governing 
class ;  that  if  they  proved  too  hard-bit  for  me  I  supposed  I 
would  have  to  quit,  but  that  I  certainly  would  not  quit  until 
I  had  made  the  effort  and  found  out  whether  I  really  was 
too  weak  to  hold  my  own  in  the  rough  and  tumble. 

The  Eepublican  Association  of  which  I  became  a  member 
held  its  meetings  in  Morton  Hall,  a  large,  barn-like  room 
over  a  saloon.  Its  furniture  was  of  the  canonical  kind: 
dingy  benches,  spittoons,  a  dais  at  one  end  with  a  table  and 
chair  and  a  stout  pitcher  for  iced  water,  and  on  the  walls 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  57 

pictures  of  General  Grant,  and  of  Levi  P.  Morton,  to  whose 
generosity  we  owed  the  room.  We  had  regular  meetings 
once  or  twice  a  month,  and  between  times  the  place  was 
treated,  at  least  on  certain  nights,  as  a  kind  of  club-room.  I 
went  around  there  often  enough  to  have  the  men  get  ac 
customed  to  me  and  to  have  me  get  accustomed  to  them,  so 
that  we  began  to  speak  the  same  language,  and  so  that  each 
could  begin  to  live  down  in  the  other's  mind  what  Bret 
Harte  has  called  "the  defective  moral  quality  of  being  a 
stranger. "  It  is  not  often  that  a  man  can  make  opportuni 
ties  for  himself.  But  he  can  put  himself  in  such  shape  that 
when  or  if  the  opportunities  come  he  is  ready  to  take  advan 
tage  of  them.  This  was  what  happened  to  me  in  connection 
with  my  experiences  in  Morton  Hall.  I  soon  became  on 
good  terms  with  a  number  of  the  ordinary  "heelers"  and 
even  some  of  the  minor  leaders.  The  big  leader  was  Jake 
Hess,  who  treated  me  with  rather  distant  affability.  There 
were  prominent  lawyers  and  business  men  who  belonged, 
but  they  took  little  part  in  the  actual  meetings.  What  they 
did  was  done  elsewhere.  The  running  of  the  machine  was 
left  to  Jake  Hess  and  his  captains  of  tens  and  of  hun 
dreds. 

Among  these  lesser  captains  I  soon  struck  up  a  friendship 
with  Joe  Murray,  a  friendship  which  is  as  strong  now  as  it 
was  thirty-three  years  ago.  He  had  been  born  in  Ireland, 
but  brought  to  New  York  by  his  parents  when  he  was  three 
or  four  years  old,  and,  as  he  expressed  it,  "raised  as  a  bare 
footed  boy  on  First  Avenue."  When  not  eighteen  he  had 
enlisted  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  and  taken  part  in  the 
campaign  that  closed  the  Civil  War.  Then  he  came  back 
to  First  Avenue,  and,  being  a  fearless,  powerful,  energetic 
young  fellow,  careless  and  reckless,  speedily  grew  to  some 
prominence  as  leader  of  a  gang.  In  that  district,  and  at  that 
time,  politics  was  a  rough  business,  and  Tammany  Hall  held 
unquestioned  sway.  The  district  wras  overwhelmingly  Dem 
ocratic,  and  Joe  and  his  friends  were  Democrats  who  on 
election  day  performed  the  usual  gang  work  for  the  local 
Democratic  leader,  whose  business  it  was  to  favor  and 


58    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

reward  them  in  return.  This  same  local  leader,  like  many 
other  greater  leaders,  became  puffed  up  by  prosperity,  and 
forgot  the  instruments  through  which  he  had  achieved 
prosperity.  After  one  election  he  showed  a  callous  indif 
ference  to  the  hard  work  of  the  gang  and  complete  disre 
gard  of  his  bef ore-election  promises.  He  counted  upon  the 
resentment  wearing  itself  out,  as  usual,  in  threats  and 
bluster. 

But  Joe  Murray  was  not  a  man  who  forgot.  He  explained 
to  his  gang  his  purposes  and  the  necessity  of  being  quiet. 
Accordingly  they  waited  for  their  revenge  until  the  next 
election  day.  They  then,  as  Joe  expressed  it,  decided  "to 
vote  furdest  away  from  the  leader" — I  am  using  the  lan 
guage  of  Joe's  youth — and  the  best  way  to  do  this  was  to 
vote  the  Eepublican  ticket.  In  those  days  each  party  had 
a  booth  near  the  polling-place  in  each  election  district, 
where  the  party  representative  dispensed  the  party  ballots. 
This  had  been  a  district  in  which,  as  a  rule,  very  early  in 
the  day  the  Eepublican  election  leader  had  his  hat  knocked 
over  his  eyes  and  his  booth  kicked  over  and  his  ballots  scat 
tered;  and  then  the  size  of  the  Democratic  majority  de 
pended  on  an  elastic  appreciation  of  exactly  how  much  was 
demanded  from  headquarters.  But  on  this  day  things  went 
differently.  The  gang,  with  a  Eoman  sense  of  duty,  took 
an  active  interest  in  seeing  that  the  Eepublican  was  given 
his  full  rights.  Moreover,  they  made  the  most  energetic 
reprisals  on  their  opponents,  and  as  they  were  distinctly 
the  tough  and  fighting  element,  justice  came  to  her  own  with 
a  whoop.  Would-be  repeaters  were  thrown  out  on  their 
heads.  Every  person  who  could  be  cajoled  or,  I  fear,  intim 
idated,  was  given  the  Eepublican  ticket,  and  the  upshot  was 
that  at  the  end  of  the  day  a  district  which  had  never  hitherto 
polled  more  than  two  or  three  per  cent  of  its  vote  Eepubli 
can  broke  about  even  between  the  two  parties. 

To  Joe  it  had  been  merely  an  act  of  retribution  in  so  far 
as  it  was  not  simply  a  spree.  But  the  leaders  at  the  Eepubli 
can  headquarters  did  not  know  this,  and  when  they  got  over 
their  paralyzed  astonishment  at  the  returns,  they  investi- 


PRACTICAL  POLITICS  59 

gated  to  find  out  what  it  meant.  Somebody  told  them  that 
it  represented  the  work  of  a  young  man  named  Joseph 
Murray.  Accordingly  they  sent  for  him.  The  room  in 
which  they  received  him  was  doubtless  some  place  like  Mor 
ton  Hall,  and  the  men  who  received  him  were  akin  to  those 
who  had  leadership  in  Morton  Hall ;  but  in  Joe 's  eyes  they 
stood  for  a  higher  civilization,  for  opportunity,  for  gener 
ous  recognition  of  successful  effort — in  short,  for  all  the 
things  that  an  eager  young  man  desires.  He  was  received 
and  patted  on  the  back  by  a  man  who  was  a  great  man  to 
the  world  in  which  he  lived.  He  was  introduced  to  the  audi 
ence  as  a  young  man  whose  achievement  was  such  as  to 
promise  much  for  the  future,  and  moreover  he  was  given  a 
place  in  the  post-office — as  I  have  said,  this  was  long  before 
the  day  of  Civil  Service  Keform. 

Now,  to  the  wrong  kind  of  man  all  this  might  have  meant 
nothing  at  all.  But  in  Joe  Murray's  case  it  meant  every 
thing.  He  was  by  nature  as  straight  a  man,  as  fearless  and 
as  stanchly  loyal,  as  any  one  whom  I  have  ever  met,  a  man 
to  be  trusted  in  any  position  demanding  courage,  integrity, 
and  good  faith.  He  did  his  duty  in  the  public  service,  and 
became  devotedly  attached  to  the  organization  which  he  felt 
had  given  him  his  chance  in  life.  When  I  knew  him  he  was 
already  making  his  way  up ;  one  of  the  proofs  and  evidences 
of  which  was  that  he  owned  a  first-class  racing  trotter — 
" Alice  Lane" — behind  which  he  gave  me  more  than  one 
spin.  During  this  first  winter  I  grew  to  like  Joe  and  his 
particular  cronies.  But  I  had  no  idea  that  they  especially 
returned  the  liking,  and  in  the  first  row  we  had  in  the 
organization  (which  arose  over  a  movement,  that  I  backed, 
to  stand  by  a  non-partisan  method  of  street-cleaning)  Joe 
and  all  his  friends  stood  stiffly  with  the  machine,  and  my 
side,  the  reform  side,  was  left  with  only  some  half-dozen 
votes  out  of  three  or  four  hundred.  I  had  expected  no  other 
outcome  and  took  it  good-humoredly,  but  without  changing 
my  attitude. 

Next  fall,  as  the  elections  drew  near,  Joe  thought  he 
would  like  to  make  a  drive  at  Jake  Hess,  and  after  consider- 


60    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

able  planning  decided  that  his  best  chance  lay  in  the  fight  for 
the  nomination  to  the  Assembly,  the  lower  house  of  the 
Legislature.  He  picked  me  as  the  candidate  with  whom  he 
would  be  most  likely  to  win ;  .and  win  he  did.  It  was  not  my 
fight,  it  was  Joe 's ;  and  it  was  to  him  that  I  owe  my  entry 
into  politics.  I  had  at  that  time  neither  the  reputation  nor 
the  ability  to  have  won  the  nomination  for  myself,  and  in 
deed  never  would  have  thought  of  trying  for  it. 

Jake  Hess  was  entirely  good-humored  about  it.  In  spite 
of  my  being  anti-machine,  my  relations  with  him  had  been 
friendly  and  human,  and  when  he  was  beaten  he  turned  in 
to  help  Joe  elect  me.  At  first  they  thought  they  would  take 
me  on  a  personal  canvass  through  the  saloons  along  Sixth 
Avenue.  The  canvass,  however,  did  not  last  beyond  the 
first  saloon.  I  was  introduced  with  proper  solemnity  to  the 
saloon-keeper — a  very  important  personage,  for  this  was 
before  the  days  when  saloon-keepers  became  merely  the 
mortgaged  chattels  of  the  brewers — and  he  began  to  cross- 
examine  me,  a  little  too  much  in  the  tone  of  one  who  was 
dealing  with  a  suppliant  for  his  favor.  He  said  he  expected 
that  I  would  of  course  treat  the  liquor  business  fairly;  to 
which  I  answered,  none  too  cordially,  that  I  hoped  I  should 
treat  all  interests  fairly.  He  then  said  that  he  regarded 
the  licenses  as  too  high;  to  which  I  responded  that  I  be 
lieved  they  were  really  not  high  enough,  and  that  I  should 
try  to  have  them  made  higher.  The  conversation  threatened 
to  become  stormy.  Messrs.  Murray  and  Hess,  on  some 
hastily  improvised  plea,  took  me  out  into  the  street,  and 
then  Joe  explained  to  me  that  it  was  not  worth  my  while 
staying  in  Sixth  Avenue  any  longer,  that  I  had  better  go 
right  back  to  Fifth  Avenue  and  attend  to  my  friends  there, 
and  that  he  would  look  after  my  interests  on  Sixth  Avenue. 
I  was  triumphantly  elected. 

Once  before  Joe  had  interfered  in  similar  fashion  and  se 
cured  the  nomination  of  an  Assemblyman;  and  shortly 
after  election  he  had  grown  to  feel  toward  this  Assembly 
man  that  he  must  have  fed  on  the  meat  which  rendered 
Csesar  proud,  as  he  became  inaccessible  to  the  ordinary 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  61 

mortals  whose  place  of  resort  was  Morton  Hall.  He  eyed 
me  warily  for  a  short  time  to  see  if  I  was  likely  in  this  re 
spect  to  follow  in  my  predecessor's  footsteps.  Finding  that 
I  did  not,  he  and  all  my  other  friends  and  supporters 
assumed  toward  me  the  very  pleasantest  attitude  that  it  was 
possible  to  assume.  They  did  not  ask  me  for  a  thing.  They 
accepted  as  a  matter  of  course  the  view  that  I  was  abso 
lutely  straight  and  was  trying  to  do  the  best  I  could  in  the 
Legislature.  They  desired  nothing  except  that  I  should 
make  a  success,  and  they  supported  me  with  hearty  en 
thusiasm.  I  am  a  little  at  a  loss  to  know  quite  how  to  ex 
press  the  quality  in  my  relationship  with  Joe  Murray  and 
my  other  friends  of  this  period  which  rendered  that  re 
lationship  so  beneficial  to  me.  When  I  went  into  politics  at 
this  time  I  was  not  conscious  of  going  in  with  the  set  pur 
pose  to  benefit  other  people,  but  of  getting  for  myself  a 
privilege  to  which  I  was  entitled  in  common  with  other  peo 
ple.  So  it  was  in  my  relationship  with  these  men.  If  there 
had  lurked  in  the  innermost  recesses  of  my  mind  anywhere 
the  thought  that  I  was  in  some  way  a  patron  or  a  benefactor, 
or  was  doing  something  noble  by  taking  part  in  politics,  or 
that  I  expected  the  smallest  consideration  save  what  I  could 
earn  on  my  own  merits,  I  am  certain  that  somehow  or  other 
the  existence  of  that  feeling  would  have  been  known  and  re 
sented.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  was  not  the  slightest 
temptation  on  my  part  to  have  any  such  feeling  or  any  one 
of  such  feelings.  I  no  more  expected  special  consideration 
in  politics  than  I  would  have  expected  it  in  the  boxing- 
ring.  I  wished  to  act  squarely  to  others,  and  I  wished  to  be 
able  to  show  that  I  could  hold  my  own  as  against  others. 
The  attitude  of  my  new  friends  towards  me  was  first  one 
of  polite  reserve,  and  then  that  of  friendly  alliance.  After 
wards  I  became  admitted  to  comradeship,  and  then  to  lead 
ership.  I  need  hardly  say  how  earnestly  I  believe  that  men 
should  have  a  keen  and  lively  sense  of  their  obligations  in 
politics,  of  their  duty  to  help  forward  great  causes,  and  to 
struggle  for  the  betterment  of  conditions  that  are  unjust  to 
their  fellows,  the  men  and  women  who  are  less  fortunate  in 


62    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

life.  But  in  addition  to  this  feeling  there  must  be  a  feeling 
of  real  fellowship  with  the  other  men  and  women  engaged  in 
the  same  task,  fellowship  of  work,  with  fun  to  vary  the 
work ;  for  unless  there  is  this  feeling  of  fellowship,  of  com 
mon  effort  on  an  equal  plane  for  a  common  end,  it  will  be 
difficult  to  keep  the  relations  wholesome  and  natural.  To 
be  patronized  is  as  offensive  as  to  be  insulted.  No  one  of 
us  cares  permanently  to  have  some  one  else  conscientiously 
striving  to  do  him  good ;  what  we  want  is  to  work  with  that 
some  one  else  for  the  good  of  both  of  us — any  man  will 
speedily  find  that  other  people  can  benefit  him  just  as 
much  as  he  can  benefit  them. 

Neither  Joe  Murray  nor  I  nor  any  of  our  associates  at 
that  time  were  alive  to  social  and  industrial  needs  which 
we  now  all  of  us  recognize.  But  we  then  had  very  clearly 
before  our  minds  the  need  of  practically  applying  certain 
elemental  virtues,  the  virtues  of  honesty  and  efficiency  in 
politics,  the  virtue  of  efficiency  side  by  side  with  honesty 
in  private  and  public  life  alike,  the  virtues  of  consideration 
and  fair  dealing  in  business  as  between  man  and  man,  and 
especially  as  between  the  man  who  is  an  employer  and  the 
man  who  is  an  employee.  On  all  fundamental  questions 
Joe  Murray  and  I  thought  alike.  We  never  parted  company 
excepting  on  the  question  of  Civil  Service  Eeform,  where 
he  sincerely  felt  that  I  showed  doctrinaire  affinities,  that  I 
sided  with  the  pharisees.  We  got  back  again  into  close  re 
lations  as  soon  as  I  became  Police  Commissioner  under 
Mayor  Strong,  for  Joe  was  then  made  Excise  Commissioner, 
and  was,  I  believe,  the  best  Excise  Commissioner  the  city 
of  New  York  ever  had.  He  is  now  a  farmer,  his  boys  have 
been  through  Columbia  College,  and  he  and  I  look  at  the 
questions,  political,  social,  and  industrial,  which  confront 
us  in  1913  from  practically  the  same  standpoint,  just  as  we 
once  looked  at  the  questions  that  confronted  us  in  1881. 

There  are  many  debts  that  I  owe  Joe  Murray,  and  some 
for  which  he  was  only  unconsciously  responsible.  I  do  not 
think  that  a  man  is  fit  to  do  good  work  in  our  American 
democracy  unless  he  is  able  to  have  a  genuine  fellow-feeling 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  63 

for,  understanding  of,  and  sympathy  with  his  fellow-Ameri 
cans,  whatever  their  creed  or  their  birthplace,  the  section 
in  which  they  live,  or  the  work  which  they  do,  provided  they 
possess  the  only  kind  of  Americanism  that  really  counts, 
the  Americanism  of  the  spirit.  It  was  no  small  help  to  me, 
in  the  effort  to  make  myself  a  good  citizen  and  good  Ameri 
can,  that  the  political  associate  with  whom  I  was  on  closest 
and  most  intimate  terms  during  my  early  years  was  a  man 
born  in  Ireland,  by  creed  a  Catholic,  with  Joe  Murray's 
upbringing ;  just  as  it  helped  me  greatly  at  a  later  period 
to  work  for  certain  vitally  necessary  public  needs  with 
Arthur  von  Briesen,  in  whom  the  spirit  of  the  "Acht-und- 
Vierziger"  idealists  was  embodied;  just  as  my  whole  life 
was  influenced  by  my  long  association  with  Jacob  Riis, 
whom  I  am  tempted  to  call  the  best  American  I  ever  knew, 
although  he  was  already  a  young  man  when  he  came  hither 
from  Denmark. 

I  was  elected  to  the  Legislature  in  the  fall  of  1881,  and 
found  myself  the  youngest  man  in  that  body.  I  was  re- 
elected  the  two  following  years.  Like  all  young  men  and  in 
experienced  members,  I  had  considerable  difficulty  in  teach 
ing  myself  to  speak.  I  profited  much  by  the  advice  of  a 
hard-headed  old  countryman  — who  was  unconsciously  para 
phrasing  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  who  was  himself  doubt 
less  paraphrasing  somebody  else.  The  advice  ran:  " Don't 
speak  until  you  are  sure  you  have  something  to  say,  and 
know  just  what  it  is;  then  say  it,  and  sit  down." 

My  first  days  in  the  Legislature  were  much  like  those  of 
a  boy  in  a  strange  school.  My  fellow-legislators  and  I  eyed 
one  another  with  mutual  distrust.  Each  of  us  chose  his 
seat,  each  began  by  following  the  lead  of  some  veteran  in 
the  first  routine  matters,  and  then,  in  a  week  or  two,  we 
began  to  drift  into  groups  according  to  our  several  affinities. 
The  Legislature  was  Democratic.  I  was  a  Republican  from 
the  "silk  stocking"  district,  the  wealthiest  district  in  New 
York,  and  I  was  put,  as  one  of  the  minority  members,  on  the 
Committee  of  Cities.  It  was  a  coveted  position.  I  did  not 
make  any  effort  to  get  on,  and,  as  far  as  I  know,  was  put 


64    THEODOEE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

there  merely  because  it  was  felt  to  be  in  accordance  with 
the  fitness  of  things. 

A  very  short  experience  showed  me  that,  as  the  Legis 
lature  was  then  constituted,  the  so-called  party  contests  had 
no  interest  whatever  for  me.  There  was  no  real  party  di 
vision  on  most  of  the  things  that  were  of  concern  in  State 
politics,  both  Republicans  and  Democrats  being  for  and 
against  them.  My  friendships  were  made,  not  with  regard 
to  party  lines,  but  because  I  found,  and  my  friends  found, 
that  we  had  the  same  convictions  on  questions  of  principle 
and  questions  of  policy.  The  only  difference  was  that  there 
was  a  larger  proportion  of  these  men  among  the  Eepubli- 
cans  than  among  the  Democrats,  and  that  it  was  easier  for 
me  at  the  outset  to  scrape  acquaintance,  among  the  men 
who  felt  as  I  did,  with  the  Eepublicans.  They  were  for  the 
most  part  from  the  country  districts. 

My  closest  friend  for  the  three  years  I  was  there  was  Billy 

0  'Neill,  from  the  Adirondacks.    He  kept  a  small  crossroads 
store.    He  was  a  young  man,  although  a  few  years  older 
than  I  was,  and,  like  myself,  had  won  his  position  without 
regard  to  the  machine.    He  had  thought  he  would  like  to  be 
Assemblyman,  so  he  had  taken  his  buggy  and  had  driven 
around  Franklin  County  visiting  everybody,  had  upset  the 
local  ring,  and  came  to  the  Legislature  as  his  own  master. 
There  is  surely  something  in  American  traditions  that  does 
tend  towards  real  democracy  in  spite  of  our  faults  and 
shortcomings.    In  most  other  countries  two  men  of  as  differ 
ent  antecedents,  ancestry,  and  surroundings  as  Billy  0  'Neill 
and  I  would  have  had  far  more  difficulty  in  coming  together. 

1  came  from  the  biggest  city  in  America  and  from  the 
wealthiest  ward  of  that  city,  and  he  from  a  backwoods 
county  where  he  kept  a  store  at  a  crossroads.    In  all  the  un 
important  things  we  seemed  far  apart.    But  in  all  the  im 
portant  things  wTe  were  close  together.    We  looked  at  all 
questions  from  substantially  the  same  view-point,  and  we 
stood  shoulder  to  shoulder  in  every  legislative  fight  during 
those  three  years.    He  abhorred  demagogy  just  as  he  ab 
horred  corruption.    He  had  thought  much  on  political  prob- 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  65 

lems;  he  admired  Alexander  Hamilton  as  much  as  I  did, 
being  a  strong  believer  in  a  powerful  National  government ; 
and  we  both  of  us  differed  from  Alexander  Hamilton  in  be 
ing  stout  adherents  of  Abraham  Lincoln's  views  wherever 
the  rights  of  the  people  were  concerned.  Any  man  who  has 
met  with  success,  if  he  will  be  frank  with  himself,  must 
admit  that  there  has  been  a  big  element  of  fortune  in  the 
success.  Fortune  favored  me,  whereas  her  hand  was  heavy 
against  Billy  O'Neill.  All  his  life  he  had  to  strive  hard  to 
wring  his  bread  from  harsh  surroundings  and  a  reluctant 
fate ;  if  fate  had  been  but  a  little  kinder,  I  believe  he  would 
have  had  a  great  political  career ;  and  he  would  have  done 
good  service  for  the  country  in  any  position  in  which  he 
might  have  been  put. 

There  were  other  Eepublicans,  like  Isaac  Hunt  and  Jonas 
van  Duzer  and  Walter  Howe  and  Henry  Sprague,  who  were 
among  my  close  friends  and  allies ;  and  a  gigantic  one-eyed 
veteran  of  the  Civil  War,  a  gallant  General,  Curtis  from  St. 
Lawrence  County;  and  a  capital  fellow,  whom  afterwards, 
when  Governor,  I  put  on  the  bench,  Kruse,  from  Cattarau- 
gus  County.  Kruse  was  a  German  by  birth;  as  far  as  I 
know,  the  only  German  from  Cattaraugus  County  at  that 
time ;  and,  besides  being  a  German,  he  was  also  a  Prohibi 
tionist.  Among  the  Democrats  were  Hamden  Eobb  and 
Thomas  Newbold,  and  Tom  Welch  of  Niagara,  who  did  a 
great  service  in  getting  the  State  to  set  aside  Niagara  Falls 
Park — after  a  discouraging  experience  with  the  first  Gover 
nor  before  whom  we  brought  the  bill,  who  listened  with 
austere  patience  to  our  arguments  in  favor  of  the  State 
establishing  a  park,  and  then  conclusively  answered  us  by 
the  question,  "But,  gentlemen,  why  should  we  spend  the 
people 's  money  when  just  as  much  water  will  run  over  the 
Falls  without  a  park  as  with  it  ?  "  Then  there  were  a  couple 
of  members  from  New  York  and  Brooklyn,  Mike  Costello 
and  Pete  Kelly. 

Mike  Costello  had  been  elected  as  a  Tammany  man.  He 
was  as  fearless  as  he  was  honest.  He  came  from  Ireland, 
and  had  accepted  the  Tammany  Fourth  of  July  orations  as 


66    THEODORE   KOOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

indicating  the  real  attitude  of  that  organization  towards 
the  rights  of  the  people.  A  month  or  two  in  Albany  con 
verted  him  to  a  profound  distrust  of  applied  Tammany 
methods.  He  and  I  worked  hand  in  hand  with  equal  indif 
ference  to  our  local  machines.  His  machine  leaders  warned 
him  fairly  that  they  would  throw  him  out  at  the  next  elec 
tion,  which  they  did;  but  he  possessed  a  seasoned-hickory 
toughness  of  ability  to  contend  with  adverse  circumstances, 
and  kept  his  head  well  above  water.  A  better  citizen  does 
not  exist ;  and  our  friendship  has  never  faltered. 

Peter  Kelly's  fate  was  a  tragedy.  He  was  a  bright,  well- 
educated  young  fellow,  an  ardent  believer  in  Henry  George. 
At  the  beginning  he  and  I  failed  to  understand  each  other 
or  to  get  on  together,  for  our  theories  of  government  were 
radically  opposed.  After  a  couple  of  months  spent  in  active 
contests  with  men  whose  theories  had  nothing  whatever  to 
do  with  their  practices,  Kelly  and  I  found  in  our  turn  that 
it  really  did  not  make  much  difference  what  our  abstract 
theories  were  on  questions  that  were  not  before  the  Legis 
lature,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  on  the  actual  matters  before 
the  Legislature,  the  most  important  of  which  involved  ques 
tions  of  elementary  morality,  we  were  heartily  at  one.  We 
began  to  vote  together  and  act  together,  and  by  the  end  of 
the  session  found  that  in  all  practical  matters  that  were  up 
for  action  we  thought  together.  Indeed,  each  of  us  was  be 
ginning  to  change  his  theories,  so  that  even  in  theory  we 
were  coming  closer  together.  He  was  ardent  and  generous ; 
he  was  a  young  lawyer,  with  a  wife  and  children,  whose  am 
bition  had  tempted  him  into  politics,  and  who  had  been  be 
friended  by  the  local  bosses  under  the  belief  that  they  could 
count  upon  him  for  anything  they  really  wished.  Unfortu 
nately,  what  they  really  wished  was  often  corrupt.  Kelly 
defied  them,  fought  the  battles  of  the  people  with  ardor  and 
good  faith,  and  when  the  bosses  refused  him  a  renomination, 
he  appealed  from  them  to  the  people.  When  we  both  came 
np  for  reelection,  I  won  easily  in  my  district,  where  circum 
stances  conspired  to  favor  me ;  and  Kelly,  with  exactly  the 
sam«  record  that  I  had,  except  that  it  was  more  creditable 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  6? 

because  he  took  his  stand  against  greater  odds,  was  beaten 
in  his  district.  Defeat  to  me  would  have  meant  merely 
chagrin;  to  Kelly  it  meant  terrible  material  disaster.  He 
had  no  money.  Like  every  rigidly  honest  man,  he  had 
found  that  going  into  politics  was  expensive  and  that  his 
salary  as  Assemblyman  did  not  cover  the  financial  outgo. 
He  had  lost  his  practice  and  he  had  incurred  the  ill  will 
of  the  powerful,  so  that  it  was  impossible  at  the  moment  to 
pick  up  his  practice  again ;  and  the  worry  and  disappoint 
ment  affected  him  so  much  that  shortly  after  election  he 
was  struck  down  by  sickness.  Just  before  Christmas  some 
of  us  were  informed  that  Kelly  was  in  such  financial  straits 
that  he  and  his  family  would  be  put  out  into  the  street  be 
fore  New  Year.  This  was  prevented  by  the  action  of  some 
of  his  friends  who  had  served  with  him  in  the  Legislature, 
and  he  recovered,  at  least  to  a  degree,  and  took  up  the 
practice  of  his  profession.  But  he  was  a  broken  man.  In 
ithe  Legislature  in  which  he  served  one  of  his  fellow-Demo 
crats  from  Brooklyn  was  the  Speaker — Alfred  C.  Chapin, 
the  leader  and  the  foremost  representative  of  the  reform 
Democracy,  whom  Kelly  zealously  supported.  A  few  years 
later  Chapin,  a  very  able  man,  was  elected  Mayor  of  Brook 
lyn  on  a  reform  Democratic  ticket.  Shortly  after  his  elec 
tion  I  was  asked  to  speak  at  a  meeting  in  a  Brooklyn  club  at 
which  various  prominent  citizens,  including  the  Mayor, 
were  present.  I  spoke  on  civic  decency,  and  towards  the 
close  of  my  speech  I  sketched  Kelly's  career  for  my  audi 
ence,  told  them  how  he  had  stood  up  for  the  rights  of  the 
people  of  Brooklyn,  and  how  the  people  had  failed  to  stand 
up  for  him,  and  the  way  he  had  been  punished,  precisely  be 
cause  he  had  been  a  good  citizen  who  acted  as  a  good  citizen 
should  act.  I  ended  by  saying  that  the  reform  Democracy 
had  now  come  into  power,  that  Mr.  Chapin  was  Mayor,  and 
that  I  very  earnestly  hoped  recognition  would  at  last  be 
given  to  Kelly  for  the  fight  he  had  waged  at  such  bitter  cost 
to  himself.  My  words  created  some  impression,  and  Mayor 
Chapin  at  once  said  that  he  would  take  care  of  Kelly  and 
see  that  justice  was  done  him.  I  went  home  that  evening 


68    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

much  pleased.  In  the  morning,  at  breakfast,  I  received  a 
brief  note  from  Chapin  in  these  words:  "It  was  nine  last 
evening  when  you  finished  speaking  of  what  Kelly  had 
done,  and  when  I  said  that  I  would  take  care  of  him.  At 
ten  last  night  Kelly  died. ' 9  He  had  been  dying  while  I  was 
making  my  speech,  and  he  never  knew  that  at  last  there 
was  to  be  a  tardy  recognition  of  what  he  had  done,  a  tardy 
justification  for  the  sacrifices  he  had  made.  The  man  had 
fought,  at  heavy  cost  to  himself  and  with  entire  disinterest 
edness,  for  popular  rights;  but  no  recognition  for  what  he 
had  done  had  come  to  him  from  the  people,  whose  interest 
he  had  so  manfully  upheld. 

Where  there  is  no  chance  of  statistical  or  mathematical 
measurement,  it  is  very  hard  to  tell  just  the  degree  to  which 
conditions  change  from  one  period  to  another.  This  is 
peculiarly  hard  to  do  when  we  deal  with  such  a  matter  as 
corruption.  Personally  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  in  public 
life  we  are  on  the  whole  a  little  better  and  not  a  little  worse 
than  we  were  thirty  years  ago,  when  I  was  serving  in  the 
New  York  Legislature.  I  think  the  conditions  are  a  little 
better  in  National,  in  State,  and  in  municipal  politics. 
Doubtless  there  are  points  in  which  they  are  worse,  and 
there  is  an  enormous  amount  that  needs  reformation.  But 
it  does  seem  to  me  as  if,  on  the  whole,  things  had  slightly 
improved. 

When  I  went  into  politics,  New  York  City  was  under  the 
control  of  Tammany,  which  was  from  time  to  time  opposed 
by  some  other — and  evanescent — city  Democratic  organi 
zation.  The  up-country  Democrats  had  not  yet  fallen  under 
Tammany  sway,  and  were  on  the  point  of  developing  a  big 
country  political  boss  in  the  shape  of  David  B.  Hill.  The 
Republican  party  was  split  into  the  Stalwart  and  Half- 
Breed  factions.  Accordingly  neither  party  had  one  domi 
nant  boss,  or  one  dominant  machine,  each  being  controlled 
by  jarring  and  warring  bosses  and  machines.  The  cor 
ruption  was  not  what  it  had  been  in  the  days  of  Tweed, 
when  outside  individuals  controlled  the  legislators  like 
puppets.  Nor  was  there  any  such  centralization  of  the  boss 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  69 

system  as  occurred  later.  Many  of  the  members  were  under 
the  control  of  local  bosses  or  local  machines.  But  the  cor 
rupt  work  was  usually  done  through  the  members  directly. 
Of  course  I  never  had  anything  in  the  nature  of  legal 
proof  of  corruption,  and  the  figures  I  am  about  to  give  are 
merely  approximate.  But  three  years'  experience  con 
vinced  me,  in  the  first  place,  that  there  were  a  great  many 
thoroughly  corrupt  men  in  the  Legislature,  perhaps  a  third 
of  the  whole  number ;  and,  in  the  next  place,  that  the  honest 
men  outnumbered  the  corrupt  men,  and  that,  if  it  were  ever 
possible  to  get  an  issue  of  right  and  wrong  put  vividly  and 
unmistakably  before  them  in  a  way  that  would  arrest  their 
attention  and  that  would  arrest  the  attention  of  their  con 
stituents,  we  could  count  on  the  triumph  of  the  right.  The 
trouble  was  that  in  most  cases  the  issue  was  confused.  To 
read  some  kinds  of  literature  one  would  come  to  the  con 
clusion  that  the  only  corruption  in  legislative  circles  was  in 
the  form  of  bribery  by  corporations,  and  that  the  line  was 
sharp  between  the  honest  man  who  was  always  voting 
against  corporations  and  the  dishonest  man  who  was  always 
bribed  to  vote  for  them.  My  experience  was  the  direct  con 
trary  of  this.  For  every  one  bill  introduced  (not  passed) 
corruptly  to  favor  a  corporation,  there  were  at  least  ten  in 
troduced  (not  passed,  and  in  this  case  not  intended  to  be 
passed)  to  blackmail  corporations.  The  majority  of  the 
corrupt  members  would  be  found  voting  for  the  blackmail 
ing  bills  if  they  were  not  paid,  and  would  also  be  found  vot 
ing  in  the  interests  of  the  corporation  if  they  were  paid.  The 
blackmailing,  or,  as  they  were  always  called,  the  "  strike " 
bills,  could  themselves  be  roughly  divided  into  two  cate 
gories  :  bills  which  it  would  have  been  proper  to  pass,  and 
those  that  it  would  not  have  been  proper  to  pass.  Some  of 
the  bills  aimed  at  corporations  were  utterly  wild  and  im 
proper  ;  and  of  these  a  proportion  might  be  introduced  by 
honest  and  foolish  zealots,  whereas  most  of  them  were  in 
troduced  by  men  who  had  not  the  slightest  intention  of 
passing  them,  but  who  wished  to  be  paid  not  to  pass  them. 
The  most  profitable  type  of  bill  to  the  accomplished  black- 


70    THEODOEE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

mailer,  however,  was  a  bill  aimed  at  a  real  corporate  abuse 
which  the  corporation,  either  from  wickedness  or  folly,  was 
unwilling  to  remedy.  Of  the  measures  introduced  in  the  in 
terest  of  corporations  there  were  also  some  that  were  proper 
and  some  that  were  improper.  The  corrupt  legislators,  the 
"black  horse  cavalry,"  as  they  were  termed,  would  demand 
payment  to  vote  as  the  corporations  wished,  no  matter 
whether  the  bill  was  proper  or  improper.  Sometimes,  if 
the  bill  was  a  proper  one,  the  corporation  would  have  the 
virtue  or  the  strength  of  mind  to  refuse  to  pay  for  its  pas 
sage,  and  sometimes  it  would  not. 

A  very  slight  consideration  of  the  above  state  of  affairs 
will  show  how  difficult  it  was  at  times  to  keep  the  issue  clear, 
for  honest  and  dishonest  men  were  continually  found  side 
by  side  voting  now  against  and  now  for  a  corporation  meas 
ure,  the  one  set  from  proper  and  the  other  set  from  grossly 
improper  motives.  Of  course  part  of  the  fault  lay  in  the 
attitude  of  outsiders.  It  was  very  early  borne  in  upon  me 
that  almost  equal  harm  was  done  by  indiscriminate  defense 
of,  and  indiscriminate  attack  on,  corporations.  It  was  hard 
to  say  whether  the  man  who  prided  himself  upon  always 
antagonizing  the  corporations,  or  the  man  who,  on  the  plea 
that  he  was  a  good  conservative,  always  stood  up  for  them, 
was  the  more  mischievous  agent  of  corruption  and  de 
moralization. 

In  one  fight  in  the  House  over  a  bill  as  to  which  there  was 
a  bitter  contest  between  two  New  York  City  street  railway 
organizations,  I  saw  lobbyists  come  down  on  the  floor  itself 
end  draw  venal  men  out  into  the  lobbies  with  almost  no 
pretense  of  concealing  what  they  were  doing.  In  another 
case  in  which  the  elevated  railway  corporations  of  New 
York  City,  against  the  protest  of  the  Mayor  and  the  other 
local  authorities,  rushed  through  a  bill  remitting  over  half 
their  taxes,  some  of  the  members  who  voted  for  the  measure 
probably  thought  it  was  right;  but  every  corrupt  man  in 
the  House  voted  with  them ;  and  the  man  must  indeed  have 
.been  stupid  who  thought  that  these  votes  were  given  dis 
interestedly. 


PRACTICAL  POLITICS  71 

The  effective  fight  against  this  bill  for  the  revision  of  the 
elevated  railway  taxes — perhaps  the  most  openly  crooked 
measure  which  during  my  time  was  pushed  at  Albany — was 
waged  by  Mike  Costello  and  myself.  We  used  to  spend  a 
good  deal  of  time  in  industrious  research  into  the  various 
bills  introduced,  so  as  to  find  out  what  their  authors  really 
had  in  mind;  this  research,  by  the  way,  being  highly  un 
appreciated  and  much  resented  by  the  authors.  In  the 
course  of  his  researches  Mike  had  been  puzzled  by  an  un 
important  bill,  seemingly  related  to  a  Constitutional  amend 
ment,  introduced  by  a  local  saloon-keeper,  whose  interests, 
as  far  as  we  knew,  were  wholly  remote  from  the  Constitu 
tion,  or  from  any  form  of  abstract  legal  betterment.  How 
ever,  the  measure  seemed  harmless;  we  did  not  interfere; 
and  it  passed  the  House.  Mike,  however,  followed  its  career 
in  the  Senate,  and  at  the  last  moment,  almost  by  accident, 
discovered  that  it  had  been  "amended"  by  the  simple 
process  of  striking  out  everything  after  the  enacting  clause 
and  unobtrusively  substituting  the  proposal  to  remit  the 
elevated  railway  taxes !  The  authors  of  the  change  wished 
to  avoid  unseemly  publicity;  their  hope  was  to  slip  the 
measure  through  the  Legislature  and  have  it  instantly 
signed  by  the  Governor,  before  any  public  attention  was  ex 
cited.  In  the  Senate  their  plan  worked  to  perfection.  There 
was  in  the  Senate  no  fighting  leadership  of  the  forces  of 
decency;  and  for  such  leadership  of  the  non-fighting  type 
the  representatives  of  corruption  cared  absolutely  nothing. 
By  bold  and  adroit  management  the  substitution  in  the 
Senate  was  effected  without  opposition  or  comment.  The 
bill  (in  reality,  of  course,  an  absolutely  new  and  undebated 
bill)  then  came  back  to  the  House  nominally  as  a  merely 
amended  measure,  which,  under  the  rules,  was  not  open  to 
debate  unless  the  amendment  was  first  by  vote  rejected. 
This  was  the  great  bill  of  the  session  for  the  lobby;  and  the 
lobby  was  keenly  alive  to  the  need  of  quick,  wise  action. 
No  public  attention  whatever  had  so  far  been  excited. 
Every  measure  was  taken  to  secure  immediate  and  silent 
action.  A  powerful  leader,  whom  the  beneficiaries  of  the 


72    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

bill  trusted,  a  fearless  and  unscrupulous  man,  of  much  force 
and  great  knowledge  of  parliamentary  law,  was  put  in  the 
chair.  Costello  and  I  were  watched ;  and  when  for  a  moment 
we  were  out  of  the  House,  the  bill  was  brought  over  from 
the  Senate,  and  the  clerk  began  to  read  it,  all  the  black 
horse  cavalry,  in  expectant  mood,  being  in  their  seats.  But 
Mike  Costello,  who  was  in  the  clerk's  room,  happened  to 
catch  a  few  words  of  what  was  being  read.  In  he  rushed, 
despatched  a  messenger  for  me,  and  began  a  single-handed 
filibuster.  The  Speaker  pro  tern  called  him  to  order.  Mike 
continued  to  speak  and  protest;  the  Speaker  hammered 
him  down;  Mike  continued  his  protests;  the  sergeant-at- 
arms  was  sent  to  arrest  and  remove  him ;  and  then  I  bounced 
in,  and  continued  the  protest,  and  refused  to  sit  down  or  be 
silent.  Amid  wild  confusion  the  amendment  was  declared 
adopted,  and  the  bill  was  ordered  engrossed  and  sent  to  the 
Grove rnor.  But  we  had  carried  our  point.  The  next  morn 
ing  the  whole  press  rang  with  what  had  happened;  every 
detail  of  the  bill,  and  every  detail  of  the  way  it  had  been 
slipped  through  the  Legislature,  were  made  public.  All 
the  slow  and  cautious  men  in  the  House,  who  had  been  afraid 
of  taking  sides,  now  came  forward  in  support  of  us.  Another 
debate  was  held  on  the  proposal  to  rescind  the  vote ;  the  city 
authorities  waked  up  to  protest;  the  Governor  refused  to 
sign  the  bill.  Two  or  three  years  later,  after  much  litiga 
tion,  the  taxes  were  paid;  in  the  newspapers  it  was  stated 
that  the  amount  was  over  $1,500,000.  It  was  Mike  Costello 
to  whom  primarily  was  due  the  fact  that  this  sum  was  saved 
the  public,  and  that  the  forces  of  corruption  received  a 
stinging  rebuff.  He  did  not  expect  recognition  or  reward 
for  his  services ;  and  he  got  none.  The  public,  if  it  knew  of 
what  he  had  done,  promptly  forgot  it.  The  machine  did  not 
forget  it,  and  turned  him  down  at  the  next  election. 

One  of  the  stand-by  "strikes"  was  a  bill  for  reducing  the 
elevated  railway  fare,  which  at  that  time  was  ten  cents,  to 
five  cents.  In  one  Legislature  the  men  responsible  for  the 
introduction  of  the  bill  suffered  such  an  extraordinary 
change  of  heart  that  when  the  bill  came  up — being  pushed 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  73 

by  zealous  radicals  who  really  were  honest — the  introducers 
actually  voted  against  it!  A  number  of  us  who  had  been 
very  doubtful  about  the  principle  of  the  bill  voted  for  it 
simply  because  we  were  convinced  that  money  was  being 
used  to  stop  it,  and  we  hated  -to  seem  to  side  with  the  cor- 
ruptionists.  Then  there  came  a  wave  of  popular  feeling 
in  its  favor,  the  bill  was  reintroduced  at  the  next  session, 
the  railways  very  wisely  decided  that  they  would  simply 
fight  it  on  its  merits,  and  the  entire  black  horse  cavalry 
contingent,  together  with  all  the  former  friends  of  the  meas 
ure,  voted  against  it.  Some  of  us,  who  in  our  anger  at  the 
methods  formerly  resorted  to  for  killing  the  bill  had  voted 
for  it  the  previous  year,  with  much  heart-searching  again 
voted  for  it,  as  I  now  think  unwisely;  and  the  bill  was 
vetoed  by  the  then  Governor,  Grover  Cleveland.  I  believe 
the  veto  was  proper,  and  those  who  felt  as  I  did  supported 
the  veto;  for  although  it  was  entirely  right  that  the  fare 
should  be  reduced  to  five  cents,  which  was  soon  afterwards 
done,  the  method  was  unwise,  and  would  have  set  a  mischie 
vous  precedent. 

An  instance  of  an  opposite  kind  occurred  in  connection 
with  a  great  railway  corporation  which  wished  to  increase 
its  terminal  facilities  in  one  of  our  great  cities.  The  repre 
sentatives  of  the  railway  brought  the  bill  to  me  and  asked 
me  to  look  into  it,  saying  that  they  were  well  aware  that  it 
was  the  kind  of  bill  that  lent  itself  to  blackmail,  and  that 
they  wished  to  get  it  through  on  its  merits,  and  invited  the 
most  careful  examination.  I  looked  carefully  into  it,  found 
that  the  municipal  authorities  and  the  property-owners 
whose  property  was  to  be  taken  favored  it,  and  also  found 
that  it  was  an  absolute  necessity  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  city  no  less  than  from  the  standpoint  of  the  railway. 
So  I  said  I  would  take  charge  of  it  if  I  had  guarantees  that 
no  money  should  be  used  and  nothing  improper  done  in 
order  to  push  it.  This  was  agreed  to.  I  was  then  acting 
as  chairman  of  the  committee  before  which  the  bill  went. 

A  very  brief  experience  proved  what  I  had  already  been 
practically  sure  of,  that  there  was  a  secret  combination  of 


74    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

the  majority  of  the  committee  on  a  crooked  basis.  On  one 
pretext  or  another  the  crooked  members  of  the  committee 
held  the  bill  up,  refusing  to  report  it  either  favorably  or  un 
favorably.  There  were  one  or  two  members  of  the  com 
mittee  who  were  pretty  rough  characters,  and  when  I  de 
cided  to  force  matters  I  was  not  sure  that  we  would  not  have 
trouble.  There  was  a  broken  chair  in  the  room,  and  I  got 
a  leg  of  it  loose  and  put  it  down  beside  me  where  it  was  not 
visible,  but  where  I  might  get  at  it  in  a  hurry  if  necessary. 
I  moved  that  the  bill  be  reported  favorably.  This  was  voted 
down  without  debate  by  the  "combine,"  some  of  whom  kept 
a  wooden  stolidity  of  look,  while  others  leered  at  me  with 
sneering  insolence.  I  then  moved  that  it  be  reported  un 
favorably,  and  again  the  motion  was  voted  down  by  the  same 
majority  and  in  the  same  fashion.  I  then  put  the  bill  in 
my  pocket  and  announced  that  I  would  report  it  anyhow. 
This  almost  precipitated  a  riot,  especially  when  I  explained, 
in  answer  to  statements  that  my  conduct  would  be  exposed 
on  the  floor  of  the  Legislature,  that  in  that  case  I  should 
give  the  Legislature  the  reasons  why  I  suspected  that  the 
men  holding  up  all  report  of  the  bill  were  holding  it  up  for 
purposes  of  blackmail.  The  riot  did  not  come  off;  partly, 
I  think,  because  the  opportune  production  of  the  chair-leg 
had  a  sedative  effect,  and  partly  owing  to  wise  counsels 
from  one  or  two  of  my  opponents. 

Accordingly  I  got  the  bill  reported  to  the  Legislature  and 
put  on  the  calendar.  But  here  it  came  to  a  dead  halt  I 
think  this  was  chiefly  because  most  of  the  newspapers  which 
noticed  the  matter  at  all  treated  it  in  such  a  cynical  spirit 
as  to  encourage  the  men  who  wished  to  blackmail.  These 
papers  reported  the  introduction  of  the  bill,  and  said  that 
"all  the  hungry  legislators  were  clamoring  for  their  share 
of  the  pie";  and  they  accepted  as  certain  the  fact  that  there 
was  going  to  be  a  division  of  "pie."  This  succeeded  in 
frightening  honest  men,  and  also  in  relieving  the  rogues; 
the  former  were  afraid  they  would  be  suspected  of  receiv 
ing  money  if  they  voted  for  the  bill,  and  the  latter  were 
given  a  shield  behind  which  to  stand  until  they  were  paid. 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  75 

I  was  wholly  unable  to  move  the  bill  forward  in  the  Legis 
lature,  and  finally  a  representative  of  the  railway  told  me 
that  he  thought  he  would  like  to  take  the  bill  out  of  my 
hands,  that  I  did  not  seem  able  to  get  it  through,  and  that 
perhaps  some  "older  and  more  experienced"  leader  could 
be  more  successful.  I  was  pretty  certain  what  this  meant, 
but  of  course  I  had  no  kind  of  proof,  and  moreover  I  was  not 
in  a  position  to  say  that  I  could  promise  success.  Accord 
ingly,  the  bill  was  given  into  the  charge  of  a  veteran,  whom 
I  believe  to  have  been  a  personally  honest  man,  but  who  was 
not  inquisitive  about  the  motives  influencing  his  colleagues. 
This  gentleman,  who  went  by  a  nickname  which  I  shall  in 
correctly  call  "the  bald  eagle  of  Weehawken,"  was  efficient 
and  knew  his  job.  After  a  couple  of  weeks  a  motion  to  put 
the  bill  through  was  made  by  "the  bald  eagle*';  the  "black 
horse  cavalry,"  whose  feelings  had  undergone  a  complete 
change  in  the  intervening  time,  voted  unanimously  for  it, 
in  company  with  all  the  decent  members ;  and  that  was  the 
end.  Now  here  was  a  bit  of  work  in  the  interest  of  a  cor 
poration  and  in  the  interest  of  a  community,  which  the  cor 
poration  at  first  tried  honestly  to  have  put  through  on  its 
merits.  The  blame  for  the  failure  lay  primarily  in  the 
supine  indifference  of  the  community  to  legislative  wrong 
doing,  so  long  as  only  the  corporations  were  blackmailed. 
Except  as  above  mentioned,  I  was  not  brought  in  contact 
with  big  business,  save  in  the  effort  to  impeach  a  certain 
judge.  This  judge  had  been  used  as  an  instrument  in  their 
business  by  certain  of  the  men  connected  with  the  elevated 
railways  and  other  great  corporations  at  that  time.  We  got 
hold  of  his  correspondence  with  one  of  these  men,  and  it 
showed  a  shocking  willingness  to  use  the  judicial  office  in 
any  way  that  one  of  the  kings  of  finance  of  that  day  desired. 
He  had  actually  held  court  in  one  of  that  financier 's  rooms. 
One  expression  in  one  of  the  judge's  letters  to  this  financier 
I  shall  always  remember:  "I  am  willing  to  go  to  the  very 
verge  of  judicial  discretion  to  serve  your  vast  interests." 
The  curious  thing  was  that  I  was  by  no  means  certain  that 
the  judge  himself  was  corrupt.  He  may  have  been;  but  I 


76    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

am  inclined  to  think  that,  aside  from  his  being  a  man  of 
coarse  moral  fiber,  the  trouble  lay  chiefly  in  the  fact  that  he 
had  a  genuine — if  I  had  not  so  often  seen  it,  I  would  say  a 
wholly  inexplicable — reverence  for  the  possessor  of  a  great 
fortune  as  such.  He  sincerely  believed  that  business  was  the 
end  of  existence,  and  that  judge  and  legislator  alike  should 
do  whatever  was  necessary  to  favor  it ;  and  the  bigger  the 
business  the  more  he  desired  to  favor  it.  Big  business 
of  the  kind  that  is  allied  with  politics  thoroughly  appre 
ciated  the  usefulness  of  such  a  judge,  and  every  effort  was 
strained  to  protect  him.  We  fought  hard — by  "we"  I  mean 
some  thirty  or  forty  legislators,  both  Eepublicans  and  Dem 
ocrats — but  the  "black  horse  cavalry,"  and  the  timid  good 
men,  and  the  dull  conservative  men,  were  all  against  us; 
and  the  vote  in  the  Legislature  was  heavily  against  impeach 
ment.  The  minority  of  the  committee  that  investigated  him, 
with  Chapin  at  its  head,  recommended  impeachment;  the 
argument  for  impeachment  before  the  committee  was  made 
by  Francis  Lynde  Stetson. 

It  was  my  first  experience  of  the  kind.  Various  men 
whom  I  had  known  well  socially  and  had  been  taught  to 
look  up  to,  prominent  business  men  and  lawyers,  acted  in  a 
way  which  not  only  astounded  me,  but  which  I  was  quite 
unable  to  reconcile  with  the  theories  I  had  formed  as  to 
their  high  standing — I  was  little  more  than  a  year  out  of 
college  at  the  time.  Generally,  as  has  been  always  the  case 
since,  they  were  careful  to  avoid  any  direct  conversation 
with  me  on  a  concrete  case  of  what  we  now  call  "privilege" 
in  business  and  in  politics,  that  is,  of  the  alliance  between 
business  and  politics  which  represents  improper  favors 
rendered  to  some  men  in  return  for  improper  conduct  on 
the  part  of  others  being  ignored  or  permitted. 

One  member  of  a  prominent  law  firm,  an  old  family  friend, 
did,  however,  take  me  out  to  lunch  one  day,  evidently  for 
the  purpose  of  seeing  just  what  it  was  that  I  wished  and 
intended  to  do.  I  believe  he  had  a  genuine  personal  liking 
for  me.  He  explained  that  I  had  done  well  in  the  Legis 
lature;  that  it  was  a  good  thing  to  have  made  the  "reform 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  77 

play,"  that  I  had  shown  that  I  possessed  ability  such  as 
would  make  me  useful  in  the  right  kind  of  law  office  or  busi 
ness  concern ;  but  that  I  must  not  overplay  my  hand ;  that 
I  had  gone  far  enough,  and  that  now  was  the  time  to  leave 
politics  and  identify  myself  with  the  right  kind  of  people, 
the  people  who  would  always  in  the  long  run  control  others 
and  obtain  the  real  rewards  which  were  worth  having.  I 
asked  him  if  that  meant  that  I  was  to  yield  to  the  ring  in 
politics.  He  answered  somewhat  impatiently  that  I  was  en 
tirely  mistaken  (as  in  fact  I  was)  about  there  being  merely 
a  political  ring,  of  the  kind  of  which  the  papers  were  fond 
of  talking;  that  the  "ring,"  if  it  could  be  called  such — that 
is,  the  inner  circle — included  certain  big  business  men,  and 
the  politicians,  lawyers,  and  judges  who  were  in  alliance 
with  and  to  a  certain  extent  dependent  upon  them,  and  that 
the  successful  man  had  to  win  his  success  by  the  backing  of 
the  same  forces,  whether  in  law,  business,  or  politics. 

This  conversation  not  only  interested  me,  but  made  such 
an  impression  that  I  always  remembered  it,  for  it  was  the 
first  glimpse  I  had  of  that  combination  between  business 
and  politics  which  I  was  in  after  years  so  often  to  oppose. 
In  the  America  of  that  day,  and  especially  among  the  people 
whom  I  knew,  the  successful  business  man  was  regarded 
by  everybody  as  preeminently  the  good  citizen.  The  ortho 
dox  books  on  political  economy,  not  only  in  America  but 
in  England,  were  written  for  his  especial  glorification.  The 
tangible  rewards  came  to  him,  the  admiration  of  his  fellow- 
citizens  of  the  respectable  type  was  apt  to  be  his,  and  the 
severe  newspaper  moralists  who  were  never  tired  of  de 
nouncing  politicians  and  political  methods  were  wont  to 
hold  up  "business  methods"  as  the  ideal  which  we  were  to 
strive  to  introduce  into  political  life.  Herbert  Croly,  in 
"The  Promise  of  American  Life,"  has  set  forth  the  reasons 
why  our  individualistic  democracy — which  taught  that  each 
man  was  to  rely  exclusively  on  himself,  was  in  no  way  to 
be  interfered  with  by  others,  and  was  to  devote  himself  to 
his  own  personal  welfare — necessarily  produced  the  type  of 
business  man  who  sincerely  believed,  as  did  the  rest  of  the 


78    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

community,  that  the  individual  who  amassed  a  big  fortune 
was  the  man  who  was  the  best  and  most  typical  American. 

In  the  Legislature  the  problems  with  which  I  dealt  were 
mainly  problems  of  honesty  and  decency  and  of  legislative 
and  administrative  efficiency.  They  represented  the  effort, 
the  wise,  the  vitally  necessary  effort,  to  get  efficient  and 
honest  government.  But  as  yet  I  understand  little  of  the 
effort  which  was  already  beginning,  for  the  most  part  under 
very  bad  leadership,  to  secure  a  more  genuine  social  and 
industrial  justice.  Nor  was  I  especially  to  blame  for  this. 
The  good  citizens  I  then  knew  best,  even  when  themselves 
men  of  limited  means — men  like  my  colleague  Billy  0  'Neill, 
and  my  backwoods  friends  Sewall  and  Dow — were  no  more 
awake  than  I  was  to  the  changing  needs  the  changing  times 
were  bringing.  Their  outlook  was  as  narrow  as  my  own, 
and,  within  its  limits,  as  fundamentally  sound. 

I  wish  to  dwell  on  the  soundness  of  our  outlook  on  life, 
even  though  as  yet  it  was  not  broad  enough.  We  were  no 
respecters  of  persons.  Where  our  vision  was  developed  to 
a  degree  that  enabled  us  to  see  crookedness,  we  opposed  it 
whether  in  great  or  small.  As  a  matter  -of  fact,  we  found 
that  it  needed  much  more  courage  to  stand  up  openly 
against  labor  men  when  they  were  wrong  than  against  capi 
talists  when  they  were  wrong.  The  sins  against  labor  are 
usually  committed,  and  the  improper  services  to  capitalists 
are  usually  rendered,  behind  closed  doors.  Very  often  the 
man  with  the  moral  courage  to  speak  in  the  open  against 
labor  when  it  is  wrong  is  the  only  man  anxious  to  do  effec 
tive  work  for  labor  when  labor  is  right. 

The  only  kinds  of  courage  and  honesty  which  are  perma 
nently  useful  to  good  institutions  anywhere  are  those  shown 
by  men  who  decide  all  cases  with  impartial  justice  on 
grounds  of  conduct  and  not  on  grounds  of  class.  We  found 
that  in  the  long  run  the  men  who  in  public  blatantly  insisted 
that  labor  was  never  wrong  were  the  very  men  who  in  pri 
vate  could  not  be  trusted  to  stand  for  labor  when  it  was 
right.  We  grew  heartily  to  distrust  the  reformer  who  never 
denounced  wickedness  unless  it  was  embodied  in  a  rich 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  79 

man.  Human  nature  does  not  change ;  and  that  type  of '  *  re 
former"  is  as  noxious  now  as  he  ever  was.  The  loud 
mouthed  upholder  of  popular  rights  who  attacks  wicked 
ness  only  when  it  is  allied  with  wealth,  and  who  never 
publicly  assails  any  misdeed,  no  matter  how  flagrant,  if 
committed  nominally  in  the  interest  of  labor,  has  either  a 
warped  mind  or  a  tainted  soul,  and  should  be  trusted  by  no 
honest  man.  It  was  largely  the  indignant  and  contemptu 
ous  dislike  aroused  in  our  minds  by  the  demagogues  of  this 
class  which  then  prevented  those  of  us  whose  instincts  at 
bottom  were  sound  from  going  as  far  as  we  ought  to  have 
gone  along  the  lines  of  governmental  control  of  corpora 
tions  and  governmental  interference  on  behalf  of  labor. 

I  did,  however,  have  one  exceedingly  useful  experience. 
A  bill  was  introduced  by  the  Cigar-Makers'  Union  to  pro 
hibit  the  manufacture  of  cigars  in  tenement-houses.  I  was 
appointed  one  of  a  committee  of  three  to  investigate  condi 
tions  in  the  tenement-houses  and  see  if  legislation  should 
be  had.  Of  my  two  colleagues  on  the  committee,  one  took 
no  interest  in  the  measure  and  privately  said  he  did  not 
think  it  was  right,  but  that  he  had  to  vote  for  it  because  the 
labor  unions  were  strong  in  his  district  and  he  was  pledged 
to  support  the  bill.  The  other,  a  sporting  Tammany  man 
who  afterwards  abandoned  politics  for'  the  race-track,  was 
a  very  good  fellow.  He  told  me  frankly  that  he  had  to  be 
against  the  bill  because  certain  interests  which  were  all- 
powerful  and  with  which  he  had  dealings  required  him  to  be 
against  it,  but  that  I  was  a  free  agent,  and  that  if  I  would 
look  into  the  matter  he  believed  I  would  favor  the  legisla 
tion.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  had  supposed  I  would  be  against 
the  legislation,  and  I  rather  think  that  I  was  put  on  the  com 
mittee  with  that  idea,  for  the  respectable  people  I  knew  were 
against  it;  it  was  contrary  to  the  principles  of  political 
economy  of  the  laissez-faire  kind ;  and  the  business  men  who 
spoke  to  me  about  it  shook  their  heads  and  said  that  it  was 
designed  to  prevent  a  man  doing  as  he  wished  and  as  he  had 
a  right  to  do  with  what  was  his  own. 

However,  my  first  visits  to  the  tenement-house  districts 


80    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

in  question  made  me  feel  that,  whatever  the  theories  might 
be,  as  a  matter  of  practical  common  sense  I  could  not  con 
scientiously  vote  for  the  continuance  of  the  conditions  which 
I  saw.  These  conditions  rendered  it  impossible  for  the 
families  of  the  tenement-house  workers  to  live  so  that  the 
children  might  grow  up  fitted  for  the  exacting  duties  of 
American  citizenship.  I  visited  the  tenement-houses  once 
with  my  colleagues  of  the  committee,  once  with  some  of  the 
labor  union  representatives,  and  once  or  twice  by  myself. 
In  a  few  of  the  tenement-houses  there  were  suites  of  rooms 
ample  in  number  where  the  work  on  the  tobacco  was  done 
in  rooms  not  occupied  for  cooking  or  sleeping  or  living.  In 
the  overwhelming  majority  of  cases,  however,  there  were 
one,  two,  or  three  room  apartments,  and  the  work  of  manu 
facturing  the  tobacco  by  men,  women,  and  children  went  on 
day  and  night  in  the  eating,  living,  and  sleeping  rooms — 
sometimes  in  one  room.  I  have  always  remembered  one 
room  in  which  two  families  were  living.  On  my  inquiry 
as  to  who  the  third  adult  male  was  I  was  told  that  he  was  a 
boarder  with  one  of  the  families.  There  were  several  chil 
dren,  three  men,  and  two  women  in  this  room.  The  tobacco 
was  stowed  about  everywhere,  alongside  the  foul  bedding, 
and  in  a  corner  where  there  were  scraps  of  food.  The  men, 
women,  and  children  in  this  room  worked  by  day  and  far 
on  into  the  evening,  and  they  slept  and  ate  there.  They 
were  Bohemians,  unable  to  speak  English,  except  that  one 
of  the  children  knew  enough  to  act  as  interpreter. 

Instead  of  opposing  the  bill  I  ardently  championed  it. 
It  was  a  poorly  drawn  measure,  and  the  Governor,  Grover 
Cleveland,  was  at  first  doubtful  about  signing  it.  The  Cigar- 
Makers  '  Union  then  asked  me  to  appear  before  the  Governor 
and  argue  for  it.  I  accordingly  did  so,  acting  as  spokesman 
for  the  battered,  undersized  foreigners  who  represented  the 
Union  and  the  workers.  The  Governor  signed  the  bill. 
Afterwards  this  tenement-house  cigar  legislation  was  de 
clared  invalid  by  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  the  Jacobs  de 
cision.  Jacobs  was  one  of  the  rare  tenement-house  manu 
facturers  of  cigars  who  occupied  quite  a  suite  of  rooms,  so 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  81 

that  in  his  case  the  living  conditions  were  altogether  excep 
tional.  What  the  reason  was  which  influenced  those  bring 
ing  the  suit  to  select  the  exceptional  instead  of  the  average 
worker  I  do  not  know ;  of  course  such  action  was  precisely 
the  action  which  those  most  interested  in  having  the  law 
broken  down  were  anxious  to  see  taken.  The  Court  of  Ap 
peals  declared  the  law  unconstitutional,  and  in  their  deci 
sion  the  judges  reprobated  the  law  as  an  assault  upon  the 
"hallowed"  influences  of  "home."  It  was  this  case  which 
first  waked  me  to  a  dim  and  partial  understanding  of  the 
fact  that  the  courts  were  not  necessarily  the  best  judges  of 
what  should  be  done  to  better  social  and  industrial  condi 
tions.  The  judges  wTho  rendered  this  decision  were  well- 
meaning  men.  They  knew  nothing  whatever  of  tenement- 
house  conditions ;  they  knew  nothing  whatever  of  the  needs, 
or  of  the  life  and  labor,  of  three-fourths  of  their  fellow-citi 
zens  in  great  cities.  They  knew  legalism,  but  not  life.  Their 
choice  of  the  words  "hallowed"  and  "home,"  as  applicable 
to  the  revolting  conditions  attending  the  manufacture  of 
cigars  in  tenement-houses,  showed  that  they  had  no  idea 
what  it  was  that  they  were  deciding.  Imagine  the  "hal 
lowed"  associations  of  a  "home"  consisting  of  one  room 
where  two  families,  one  of  them  with  a  boarder,  live,  eat 
and  work!  This  decision  completely  blocked  tenement- 
house  reform  legislation  in  New  York  for  a  score  of  years, 
and  hampers  it  to  this  day.  It  was  one  of  the  most  serious 
setbacks  which  the  cause  of  industrial  and  social  progress 
and  reform  ever  received. 

I  had  been  brought  up  to  hold  the  courts  in  especial  rev 
erence.  The  people  with  whom  I  was  most  intimate  were 
apt  to  praise  the  courts  for  just  such  decisions  as  this,  and 
to  speak  of  them  as  bulwarks  against  disorder  and  barriers 
against  demagogic  legislation.  These  were  the  same  people 
with  whom  the  judges  who  rendered  these  decisions  were 
apt  to  foregather  at  social  clubs,  or  dinners,  or  in  private 
life.  Very  naturally  they  all  tended  to  look  at  things  from 
the  same  standpoint.  Of  course  it  took  more  than  one  expe 
rience  such  as  this  Tenement  Cigar  Case  to  shake  me  out  of 


82    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

the  attitude  in  which  I  was  brought  up.  But  various  de 
cisions,  not  only  of  the  New  York  court  but  of  certain  other 
State  courts  and  even  of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court, 
during  the  quarter  of  a  century  following  the  passage  of 
this  tenement-house  legislation,  did  at  last  thoroughly  wake 
me  to  the  actual  fact.  I  grew  to  realize  that  all  that  Abra 
ham  Lincoln  had  said  about  the  Dred  Scott  decision  could 
be  said  with  equal  truth  and  justice  about  the  numerous  de 
cisions  which  in  our  own  day  were  erected  as  bars  across 
the  path  of  social  reform,  and  which  brought  to  naught  so 
much  of  the  effort  to  secure  justice  and  fair  dealing  for 
workingmen  and  workingwomen,  and  for  plain  citizens  gen 
erally. 

Some  of  the  wickedness  and  inefficiency  in  public  life  was 
then  displayed  in  simpler  fashion  than  would  probably 
now  be  the  case.  Once  or  twice  I  was  a  member  of  com 
mittees  which  looked  into  gross  and  widely  ramifying  gov 
ernmental  abuses.  On  the  whole,  the  most  important  part 
I  played  was  in  the  third  Legislature  in  which  I  served, 
when  I  acted  as  chairman  of  a  committee  which  investigated 
various  phases  of  New  York  City  official  life. 

The  most  important  of  the  reform  measures  our  commit 
tee  recommended  was  the  bill  taking  away  from  the  Alder 
men  their  power  of  confirmation  over  the  Mayor's  appoint 
ments.  We  found  that  it  was  possible  to  get  citizens  inter 
ested  in  the  character  and  capacity  of  the  head  of  the  city, 
so  that  they  would  exercise  some  intelligent  interest  in  his 
conduct  and  qualifications.  But  we  found  that  as  a  matter 
of  fact  it  was  impossible  to  get  them  interested  in  the  Alder 
men  and  other  subordinate  officers.  In  actual  practice  the 
Aldermen  were  merely  the  creatures  of  the  local  ward 
bosses  or  of  the  big  municipal  bosses,  and  where  they  con 
trolled  the  appointments  the  citizens  at  large  had  no  chance 
whatever  to  make  their  will  felt  Accordingly  we  fought 
for  the  principle,  which  I  believe  to  be  of  universal  applica 
tion,  that  what  is  needed  in  our  popular  government  is  to 
give  plenty  of  power  to  a  few  officials,  and  to  make  these 
few  officials  genuinely  and  readily  responsible  to  the  peo- 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  83 

pie  for  the  exercise  of  that  power.  Taking  away  the  con 
firming  power  of  the  Board  of  Aldermen  did  not  give  the 
citizens  of  New  York  good  government.  We  knew  that  if 
they  chose  to  elect  the  wrong  kind  of  Mayor  they  would  have 
bad  government,  no  matter  what  the  form  of  the  law  was. 
But  we  did  secure  to  them  the  chance  to  get  good  govern 
ment  if  they  desired,  and  this  was  impossible  as  long  as 
the  old  system  remained.  The  change  was  fought  in  the 
way  in  which  all  similar  changes  always  are  fought.  The 
corrupt  and  interested  politicians  were  against  it,  and 
the  battle-cries  they  used,  which  rallied  to  them  most  of  the 
unthinking  conservatives,  were  that  we  were  changing  the 
old  constitutional  system,  that  we  were  defacing  the  mon 
uments  of  the  wisdom  of  the  founders  of  the  government, 
that  we  were  destroying  that  distinction  between  legislative 
and  executive  power  which  was  the  bulwark  of  our  liberties, 
and  that  we  were  violent  and  unscrupulous  radicals  with 
no  reverence  for  the  past. 

Of  course  the  investigations,  disclosures,  and  proceed 
ings  of  the  investigating  committee  of  which  I  was  chair 
man  brought  me  into  bitter  personal  conflict  with  very 
powerful  financiers,  very  powerful  politicians,  and  with 
certain  newspapers  which  these  financiers  and  politicians 
controlled.  A  number  of  able  and  unscrupulous  men  were 
fighting,  some  for  their  financial  lives,  and  others  to  keep 
out  of  unpleasantly  close  neighborhood  to  State's  prison. 
This  meant  that  there  were  blows  to  be  taken  as  well  as 
given.  In  such  political  struggles,  those  who  went  in  for  the 
kind  of  thing  that  I  did  speedily  excited  animosities  among 
strong  and  cunning  men  who  would  stop  at  little  to  gratify 
their  animosity.  Any  man  engaged  in  this  particular  type 
of  militant  and  practical  reform  movement  was  soon  made 
to  feel  that  he  had  better  not  undertake  to  push  matters 
home  unless  his  own  character  was  unassailable.  On  one  of 
the  investigating  committees  on  which  I  served  there  was  a 
countryman,  a  very  able  man,  who,  when  he  reached  New 
York  City,  felt  as  certain  Americans  do  when  they  go  to 
Paris — that  the  moral  restraints  of  his  native  place  no 


84    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

longer  applied.  With  all  his  ability,  he  was  not  shrewd 
enough  to  realize  that  the  Police  Department  was  having 
him  as  well  as  the  rest  of  us  carefully  shadowed.  He  was 
caught  red-handed  by  a  plain-clothes  man  doing  what  he 
had  no  business  to  do ;  and  from  that  time  on  he  dared  not 
act  save  as  those  who  held  his  secret  permitted  him  to  act. 
Thenceforth  those  officials  who  stood  behind  the  Police 
Department  had  one  man  on  the  committee  on  whom  they 
could  count.  I  never  saw  terror  more  ghastly  on  a  strong 
man's  face  than  on  the  face  of  this  man  on  one  or  two  oc 
casions  when  he  feared  that  events  in  the  committee  might 
take  such  a  course  as  to  force  him  into  a  position  where  his 
colleagues  would  expose  him  even  if  the  city  officials  did  not. 
However,  he  escaped,  for  we  were  never  able  to  get  the 
kind  of  proof  which  would  warrant  our  asking  for  the  ac 
tion  in  which  this  man  could  not  have  joined. 

Traps  were  set  for  more  than  one  of  us,  and  if  we  had 
walked  into  these  traps  our  public  careers  would  have 
ended,  at  least  so  far  as  following  them  under  the  condi 
tions  which  alone  make  it  worth  while  to  be  in  public  life 
at  all.  A  man  can  of  course  hold  public  office,  and  many  a 
man  does  hold  public  office,  and  lead  a  public  career  of  a 
sort,  even  if  there  are  other  men  who  possess  secrets  about 
him  which  he  cannot  afford  to  have  divulged.  But  no  man 
can  lead  a  public  career  really  worth  leading,  no  man  can 
act  with  rugged  independence  in  serious  crises,  nor  strike 
at  great  abuses,  nor  afford  to  make  powerful  and  unscrupu 
lous  foes,  if  he  is  himself  vulnerable  in  his  private  charac 
ter.  N"or  will  clean  conduct  by  itself  enable  a  man  to  render 
good  service.  I  have  always  been  fond  of  Josh  Billings 's 
remark  that  "it  is  much  easier  to  be  a  harmless  dove  than 
a  wise  serpent/'  There  are  plenty  of  decent  legislators, 
and  plenty  of  able  legislators;  but  the  blamelessness  and 
the  fighting  edge  are  not  always  combined.  Both  qualities 
are  necessary  for  the  man  who  is  to  wage  active  battle 
against  the  powers  that  prey.  He  must  be  clean  of  life,  so 
that  he  can  laugh  when  his  public  or  his  private  record  is 
searched;  and  yet  being  clean  of  life  will  not  avail  him  if 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  85 

he  is  either  foolish  or  timid.  He  must  walk  warily  and 
fearlessly,  'and  while  he  should  never  brawl  if  he  can  avoid 
it,  he  must  be  ready  to  hit  hard  if  Vhe  need  arises.  Let  him 
remember,  by  the  way,  that  the  unforgivable  crime  is  soft 
hitting.  Do  not  hit  at  all  if  it  can  be  avoided ;  but  never  hit 
softly. 

Like  most  young  men  in  politics,  I  went  through  various 
oscillations  of  feeling  before  I  "found  myself."  At  one 
period  I  became  so  impressed  with  the  virtue  of  complete 
independence  that  I  proceeded  to  act  on  each  case  purely 
as  I  personally  viewed  it,  without  paying  any  heed  to  the 
principles  and  prejudices  of  others.  The  result  was  that  I 
speedily  and  deservedly  lost  all  power  of  accomplishing 
anything  at  all ;  and  I  thereby  learned  the  invaluable  lesson 
that  in  the  practical  activities  of  life  no  man  can  render  the 
highest  service  unless  he  can  act  in  combination  with  his 
fellows,  which  means  a  certain  amount  of  give-and-take 
between  him  and  them.  Again,  I  at  one  period  began  to 
believe  «that  I  had  a  future  before  me,  and  that  it  behooved 
me  to  be  very  far-sighted  and  scan,  each  action  carefully 
with  a  view  to  its  possible  effect  on  that  future.  This 
speedily  made  me  useless  to  the  public  and  an  object  of 
aversion  to  myself;  and  I  then  made  up  my  mind  that  I 
would  try  not  to  think  of  the  future  at  all,  but  would  pro 
ceed  on  the  assumption  that  each  office  I  held  would  be  the 
last  I  ever  should  hold,  and  that  I  would  confine  myself  to 
trying  to  do  my  work  as  well  as  possible  while  I  held  that 
office.  I  found  that  for  me  personally  this  was  the  only  way 
in  which  I  could  either  enjoy  myself  or  render  good  service 
to  the  country,  and  I  never  afterwards  deviated  from  thib 
plan. 

As  regards  political  advancement  the  bosses  could  of 
course  do  a  good  deal.  At  that  time  the  warring  Stalwart 
and  Half -Breed  factions  of  the  Republican  party  were  sup 
porting  respectively  President  Arthur  and  Senator  Miller. 
Neither  side  cared  for  me.  The  first  year  in  the  Legislature 
I  rose  to  a  position  of  leadership,  so  that  in  She  second  year, 
when  the  ^Republicans  were  in  a  minority,  I  received  the 


86    THEODORE   ROOSEVftLT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

minority  nomination  for  Speaker,  although  I  was  still  the 
youngest  man  in  the  House,  being  twenty-four  years  old. 
The  third  year  the  Republicans  carried  the  Legislature, 
and  the  bosses  at  once  *cook  a  hand  in  the  Speakership  con 
test.  I  made  a  stout  fight  for  the  nomination,  but  the 
bosses  of  the  two  fftA3tions,  the  Stalwarts  and  the  Half- 
Breeds,  combined  and  I  was  beaten.  I  was  much  chagrined 
for  the  moment.  But  the  fact  that  I  had  fought  hard  and 
efficiently,  even  though  defeated,  and  that  I  had  made  the 
fight  single-handed,  with  no  machine  back  of  me,  assured  my 
standing  as  floo/r  leader.  My  defeat  in  the  end  materially 
strengthened  my  position,  and  enabled  me  to  accomplish 
far  more  than  I  could  have  accomplished  as  Speaker. 
As  so  often,  I  found  that  the  titular  position  was  of  no  con 
sequence  ;  what  counted  was  the  combination  of  the  oppor 
tunity  with  the  ability  to  accomplish  results.  The  achieve 
ment  was  tte  all-important  thing;  the  position,  whether 
titularly  high  or  low,  was  of  consequence  only  in  so  far  as 
it  widened  the  chance  for  achievement.  After  the  session 
closed  four  of  us  who  looked  at  politics  from  the  same  stand 
point  and  were  known  as  Independent  or  Anti-Machine  He- 
publicans  were  sent  by  the  State  Convention  as  delegates- 
at-larg-e  to  the  Republican  National  Convention  of  1884, 
where  I  advocated,  as  vigorously  as  I  knew  how,  the  nomina 
tion  of  Senator  George  F.  Edmunds.  Mr.  Edmunds  was 
defeated  and  Mr.  Blame  nominated.  Mr.  Blaine  was  clearly 
the  choice  of  the  Tank  and  file  of  the  party ;  his  nomination 
was  won  in  fair  and  aboveboard  fashion,  because  the  rank 
and  file  of  the  party  stood  back  of  him ;  and  I  supported  him 
to  the  best  of  my  ability  in  the  ensuing  campaign. 

The  Speakers'hip  contest  enlightened  me  as  regards  more 
things  than  the  attitude  of  the  bosses.  I  had  already  had 
some  exasperating  experiences  with  the  "silk  stocking" 
reformer  type,  as  Abraham  Lincoln  called  it,  the  gentlemen 
who  were  very  nice,  very  refined,  who  shook  their  heads 
over  political  ciorruption  and  discussed  it  in  drawing-rooms 
and  parlors,  bat  who  were  wholly  unable  to  grapple  with 
real  men  in  re#l  life.  They  were  apt  vociferously  to  demand 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  87 

"reform"  as  if  it  were,  some  concrete  substance,  like  cake, 
which  could  be  handed  out  at  will,  in  tangible  masses,  if 
only  the  demand  were  mrgent  enough.  These  parlor  reform 
ers  made  up  for  inefficiency  in  action  by  zeal  in  criticising ; 
and  they  delighted  In  criticising  the  men  who  really  were 
doing  the  things  which  they  said  ought  to  be  done,  but 
which  they  lacked  .the  sinewy  power  to  do.  They  often 
upheld  ideals  whksh  were  not  merely  impossible  but  highly 
undesirable,  and  'thereby  played  into  the  hands  of  the  very 
politicians  to  wh  6m  they  professed  to  be  most  hostile.  More 
over,  if  they  believed  that  their  own  interests,  individually 
or  as  a  class,  .were  jeoparded,  they  were  apt  to  show  no 
higher  standards  than  did  the  men  they  usually  denounced. 

One  of  their  shibboleths  was  that  the  office  should  seek 
the  man.  and.  not  the  man  the  office.  This  is  entirely  true  of 
certain  offices  at  certain  times.  It  is  entirely  untrue  when 
the  circumstances  are  different.  It  would  have  been  un 
necessary  and  undesirable  for  Washington  to  have  sought 
the  PresWency.  But  if  Abraham  Lincoln  had  not  sought 
the  Presidency  he  never  would  have  been  nominated.  The 
objection  in  such  a  case  as  this  lies  not  to  seeking  the  office, 
but  to  seeking  it  in  any  but  an  honorable  and  proper  man 
ner,  ffhe  effect  of  the  shibboleth  in  question  is  usually 
merely  to  put  a  premium  on  hypocrisy,  and  therefore  to 
favor  the  creature  who  is  willing  to  rise  by  hypocrisy. 
Wh.en  I  ran  for  Speaker,  the  whole  body  of  machine  poli- 
tic'/ans  was  against  me,  and  my  only  chance  lay  in  arousing 
trie  people  in  the  different  districts.  To  do  this  I  had  to 
Visit  the  districts,  put  the  case  fairly  before  the  men  whom 
I  saw,  and  make  them  understand  that  I  was  really  mak 
ing  a  fight  and  would  stay  in  the  fight  to  the  end.  Yet  there 
were  reformers  who  shook  their  heads  and  deplored  my 
" activity"  in  the  canvass.  Of  course  the  one  thing  which 
corrupt  machine  politicians  most  desire  is  to  have  decent 
men  frown  on  the  activity,  that  is,  on  the  efficiency,  of  the 
honest  man  who  genuinely  wishes  to  reform  politics. 

If  efficiency  is  left  solely  to  bad  men,  and  if  virtue  is 
confined  solely  to  inefficient  men,  the  result  cannot  be  happy. 


88    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

When  I  entered  politics  there  were,,  as  there  always  had 
been — and  as  there  always  will  be — any  number  of  bad 
men  in  politics  who  were  thoroughly  efficient,  and  any  num 
ber  of  good  men  who  would  like  to  have  done  lofty  things 
in  politics  but  who  were  thoroughly  inefficient.  If  I  wished 
to  accomplish  anything  for  the  country,  my  business  was 
to  combine  decency  and  efficiency ;  to  be  a  thoroughly  prac 
tical  man  of  high  ideals  who  did  his  beat  to  reduce  those 
ideals  to  actual  practice.  This  was  my  ideal,  and  to  the 
best  of  my  ability  I  strove  to  live  up  to  it, 

To  a  young  man,  life  in  the  New  York  Legislature  was 
always  interesting  and  often  entertaining.  There  was  al 
ways  a  struggle  of  some  kind  on  hand.  Sometimes  it  was 
on  a  naked  question  of  right  and  wrong.  Sometimes  it  was 
on  a  question  of  real  constructive  statesmanship.  More 
over,  there  were  all  kinds  of  humorous  incidents^  the  humor 
being  usually  of  the  unconscious  kind.  In  one  session  of 
the  Legislature  the  New  York  City  Democratic  representa 
tives  were  split  into  two  camps,  and  there  were  two  rivals 
for  leadership.  One  of  these  was  a  thoroughly  good- 
hearted,  happy-go-lucky  person  who  was  afterwards  for 
several  years  in  Congress.  He  had  been  a  local  magistrate 
and  was  called  Judge.  Generally  he  and  I  were  friendly, 
but  occasionally  I  did  something  that  irritated  him.  H^  was 
always  willing  to  vote  for  any  other  member's  bill  himself, 
and  he  regarded  it  as  narrow-minded  for  any  one  to  oppose 
one  of  his  bills,  especially  if  the  opposition  was  upon  the 
ground  that  it  was  unconstitutional — for  his  views  of  the 
Constitution  were  so  excessively  liberal  as  to  make  evenx 
me  feel  as  if  I  belonged  to  the  straitest  sect  of  strict  con- 
structionists.  On  one  occasion  he  had  a  bill  to  appropriate 
money,  with  obvious  impropriety,  for  the  relief  of  some 
miscreant  whom  he  styled  *  *  one  of  the  honest  yeomanry  of 
the  State."  When  I  explained  to  him  that  it  was  clearly  un 
constitutional,  he  answered,  "Me  friend,  the  Constitution 
don't  touch  little  things  like  that,"  and  then  added,  with  an 
ingratiating  smile,  "Anyhow,  I'd  never  allow  the  Consti 
tution  to  come  between  friends. ' '  At  the  time  I  was  looking 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  89 

over  the  proofs  of  Mr.  Bryce's  "American  Common 
wealth/'  and  I  told  him  the  incident.  He  put  it  into  the 
first  edition  of  the  "Commonwealth";  whether  it  is  in  the 
last  edition  or  not,  I  cannot  say. 

On  another  occasion  the  same  gentleman  came  to  an  issue 
with  me  in  a  debate,  and  wound  up  his  speech  by  explaining 
that  I  occupied  what  "lawyers  would  call  a  quasi  position 
on  the  bill."  His  rival  was  a  man  of  totally  different  type, 
a  man  of  great  natural  dignity,  also  born  in  Ireland.  He 
had  served  with  gallantry  in  the  Civil  War.  After  the  close 
of  the  war  he  organized  an  expedition  to  conquer  Canada. 
The  expedition,  however,  got  so  drunk  before  reaching  Al 
bany  that  it  was  there  incarcerated  in  jail,  whereupon  its 
leader  abandoned  it  and  went  into  New  York  politics  in 
stead.  He  was  a  man  of  influence,  and  later  occupied  in  the 
Police  Department  the  same  position  as  Commissioner 
which  I  myself  at  one  time  occupied.  He  felt  that  his  rival 
had  gained  too  much  glory  at  my  expense,  and,  walking 
over  with  ceremonious  solemity  to  where  the  said  rival  was 
sitting  close  beside  me,  he  said  to  him:  "I  would  like  you  to 
know,  Mr.  Cameron  [Cameron,  of  course,  was  not  the  real 
name],  that  Mr.  Eoosevelt  knows  more  law  in  a  wake  than 
you  do  in  a  month ;  and,  more  than  that,  Michael  Cameron, 
what  do  you  mane  by  quoting  Latin  on  the  floor  of  this 
House  when  you  don't  know  the  alpha  and  omayga  of  the 
language?" 

There  was  in  the  Legislature,  during  the  deadlock  above 
mentioned,  a  man  whom  I  will  call  Brogan.  He  looked  like 
a  serious  elderly  frog.  I  never  heard  him  speak  more  than 
once.  It  was  before  the  Legislature  was  organized,  or  had 
adopted  any  rules;  and  each  day  the  only  business  was 
for  the  clerk  to  call  the  roll.  One  day  Brogan  suddenly 
rose,  and  the  following  dialogue  occurred : 

Brogan.    Misther  Clu-r-r-k! 

The  Cleric.    The  gentleman  from  New  York. 

Brogan.    I  rise  to  a  point  of  ordher  under  the  rules ! 

The  Clerk.    There  are  no  rules. 

Brogan.    Thin  I  object  to  them ! 


90    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

The  Clerk.    There  are  no  rules  to  object  to. 

Brogan.  Oh!  [nonplussed;  but  immediately  recovering 
himself].  Thin  I  move  that  they  be  amended  until  there 
ar-r-re ! 

The  deadlock  was  tedious;  and  we  hailed  with  joy  such 
enlivening  incidents  as  the  above. 

During  my  three  years'  service  in  the  Legislature  I 
worked  on  a  very  simple  philosophy  of  government.  It  was 
that  personal  character  and  initiative  are  the  prime  requi 
sites  in  political  and  social  life.  It  was  not  only  a  good  but 
an  absolutely  indispensable  theory  as  far  as  it  went;  but 
it  was  defective  in  that  it  did  not  sufficiently  allow  for  the 
need  of  collective  action.  I  shall  never  forget  the  men  with 
whom  I  worked  hand  in  hand  in  these  legislative  struggles, 
not  only  my  fellow-legislators,  but  some  of  the  newspaper 
reporters,  such  as  Spinney  and  Cunningham;  and  then  in 
addition  the  men  in  the  various  districts  who  helped  us.  We 
had  made  up  our  minds  that  we  must  not  fight  fire  with  fire, 
that  on  the  contrary  the  way  to  win  out  was  to  equal  our 
foes  in  practical  efficiency  and  yet  to  stand  at  the  opposite 
plane  from  them  in  applied  morality. 

It  was  not  always  easy  to  keep  the  just  middle,  especially 
when  it  happened  that  on  one  side  there  were  corrupt  and 
unscrupulous  demagogues,  and  on  the  other  side  corrupt 
and  unscrupulous  reactionaries.  Our  effort  was  to  hold  the 
scales  even  between  both.  We  tried  to  stand  with  the  cause 
of  righteousness  even  though  its  advocates  were  anything 
but  righteous.  We  endeavored  to  cut  out  the  abuses  of 
property,  even  though  good  men  of  property  were  misled 
into  upholding  those  abuses.  We  refused  to  be  frightened 
into  sanctioning  improper  assaults  upon  property,  although 
we  knew  that  the  champions  of  property  themselves  did 
things  that  were  wicked  and  corrupt.  We  were  as  yet  by 
no  means  as  thoroughly  awake  as  we  ought  to  have  been  to 
the  need  of  controlling  big  business  and  to  the  damage  done 
by  the  combination  of  politics  with  big  business.  In  this 
matter  I  was  not  behind  the  rest  of  my  friends ;  indeed,  I 
was  ahead  of  them,  for  no  serious  leader  in  political  life 


PRACTICAL   POLITICS  91 

then  appreciated  the  prime  need  of  grappling  with  these 
questions.  One  partial  reason — not  an  excuse  or  a  justifi 
cation,  but  a  partial  reason — for  my  slowness  in  grasping 
the  importance  of  action  in  these  matters  was  the  corrupt 
and  unattractive  nature  of  so  many  of  the  men  who  cham 
pioned  popular  reforms,  their  insincerity,  and  the  folly  of 
so  many  of  the  actions  which  they  advocated.  Even  at 
that  date  I  had  neither  sympathy  with  nor  admiration  for 
the  man  who  was  merely  a  money  king,  and  I  did  not  regard 
the  "money  touch,"  when  divorced  from  other  qualities,  as 
entitling  a  man  to  either  respect  or  consideration.  As  re 
cited  above,  we  did  on  more  than  one  occasion  fight  battles, 
in  which  we  neither  took  nor  gave  quarter,  against  the  most 
prominent  and  powerful  financiers  and  financial  interests  of 
the  day.  But  most  of  the  fights  in  which  we  were  engaged 
were  for  pure  honesty  and  decency,  and  they  were  more 
apt  to  be  against  that  form  of  corruption  which  found  its 
expression  in  demagogy  than  against  that  form  of  corrup 
tion  which  defended  or  advocated  privilege.  Fundamen 
tally,  our  fight  was  part  of  the  eternal  war  against  the 
Powers  that  Prey;  and  we  cared  not  a  whit  in  what  rank 
of  life  these  powers  were  found. 

To  play  the  demagogue  for  purposes  of  self-interest  is  a 
cardinal  sin  against  the  people  in  a  democracy,  exactly  as 
to  play  the  courtier  for  such  purposes  is  a  cardinal  sin 
against  the  people  under  other  forms  of  government.  A 
man  who  stays  long  in  our  American  political  life,  if  he  has 
in  his  soul  the  generous  desire  to  do  effective  service  for 
great  causes,  inevitably  grows  to  regard  himself  merely  as 
one  of  many  instruments,  all  of  which  it  may  be  necessary 
to  use,  one  at  one  time,  one  at  another,  in  achieving  the 
triumph  of  those  causes;  and  whenever  the  usefulness  of 
any  one  has  been  exhausted,  it  is  to  be  thrown  aside.  If 
such  a  man  is  wise,  he  will  gladly  do  the  thing  that  is  next, 
when  the  time  and  the  need  come  together,  without  asking 
what  the  future  holds  for  him.  Let  the  half-god  play  his 
part  well  and  manfully,  and  then  be  content  to  draw  aside 
when  the  god  appears.  Nor  should  he  feel  vain  regrets 


92    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

that  to  another  it  is  given  to  render  greater  services  and 
reap  a  greater  reward.  Let  it  be  enough  for  him  that  he  too 
has  served,  and  that  by  doing  well  he  has  prepared  the  way 
for  the  other  man  who  can  do  better. 


CHAPTER  IV 

IN   COWBOY   LAND 

THOUGH  I  had  previously  made  a  trip  into  the  then  Terri 
tory  of  Dakota,  beyond  the  Bed  Eiver,  it  was  not  until  1883 
that  I  went  to  the  Little  Missouri,  and  there  took  hold  of 
two  cattle  ranches,  the  Chimney  Butte  and  the  Elkhorn. 

It  was  still  the  Wild  West  in  those  days,  the  Far  West, 
the  West  of  Owen  Wister's  stories  and  Frederic  Reming 
ton's  drawings,  the  West  of  the  Indian  and  the  buffalo- 
hunter,  the  soldier  and  the  cow-puncher.  That  land  of  the 
West  has  gone  now,  "gone,  gone  with  lost  Atlantis,"  gone 
to  the  isle  of  ghosts  and  of  strange  dead  memories.  It  was 
a  land  of  vast  silent  spaces,  of  lonely  rivers,  and  of  plains 
where  the  wild  game  stared  at  the  passing  horseman.  It 
was  a  land  of  scattered  ranches,  of  herds  of  long-horned 
cattle,  and  of  reckless  riders  who  unmoved  looked  in  the 
eyes  of  life  or  of  death.  In  that  land  we  led  a  free  and 
hardy  life,  with  horse  and  with  rifle.  We  worked  under  the 
scorching  midsummer  sun,  when  the  wide  plains  shimmered 
and  wavered  in  the  heat ;  and  we  knew  the  freezing  misery 
of  riding  night  guard  round  the  cattle  in  the  late  fall  round 
up.  In  the  soft  springtime  the  stars  were  glorious  in  our 
eyes  each  night  before  we  fell  asleep ;  and  in  the  winter  we 
rode  throught  blinding  blizzards,  when  the  driven  snow-dust 
burnt  our  faces.  There  were  monotonous  days,  as  we 
guided  the  trail  cattle  or  the  beef  herds,  hour  after  hour, 
at  the  slowest  of  walks ;  and  minutes  or  hours  teeming  with 
excitement  as  we  stopped  stampedes  or  swam  the  herds 
across  rivers  treacherous  with  quicksands  or  brimmed  with 
running  ice.  We  knew  toil  and  hardship  and  hunger  and 
thirst ;  and  we  saw  men  die  violent  deaths  as  they  worked 
among  the  horses  and  cattle,  or  fought  in  evil  feuds  with 

93 


94    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

one  another ;  but  we  felt  the  beat  of  hardy  life  in  our  veins, 
and  ours  was  the  glory  of  work  and  the  joy  of  living. 

It  was  right  and  necessary  that  this  life  should  pass,  for 
the  safety  of  our  country  lies  in  its  being  made  the  country 
of  the  small  home-maker.  The  great  unfenced  ranches, 
in  the  days  of  "free  grass,"  necessarily  represented  a  tem 
porary  stage  in  our  history.  The  large  migratory  flocks  of 
sheep,  each  guarded  by  the  hired  shepherds  of  absentee 
owners,  were  the  first  enemies  of  the  cattlemen ;  and  owing 
to  the  way  they  ate  out  the  grass  and  destroyed  all  other 
vegetation,  these  roving  sheep  bands  represented  little  of 
permanent  good  to  the  country.  But  the  homesteaders, 
the  permanent  settlers,  the  men  who  took  up  each  his  own 
farm  on  which  he  lived  and  brought  up  his  family,  these 
represented  from  the  National  standpoint  the  most  desir 
able  of  all  possible  users  of,  and  dwellers  on,  the  soil.  Their 
advent  meant  the  breaking  up  of  the  big  ranches ;  and  the 
change  was  a  National  gain,  although  to  some  of  us  an  in 
dividual  loss. 

I  first  reached  the  Little  Missouri  on  a  Northern  Pacific 
train  about  three  in  the  morning  of  a  cool  September  day  in 
1883.  Aside  from  the  station,  the  only  building  was  a  ram 
shackle  structure  called  the  Pyramid  Park  Hotel.  I  dragged 
my  duffle-bag  thither,  and  hammered  at  the  door  until  the 
frowsy  proprietor  appeared,  muttering  oaths.  He  ushered 
me  upstairs,  where  I  was  given  one  of  the  fourteen  beds  in 
the  room  which  by  itself  constituted  the  entire  upper  floor. 
Next  day  I  walked  over  to  the  abandoned  army  post,  and, 
after  some  hours  among  the  gray  log  shacks,  a  ranchman 
who  had  driven  into  the  station  agreed  to  take  me  out  to  his 
ranch,  the  Chimney  Butte  ranch,  where  he  was  living  with 
his  brother  and  their  partner. 

The  ranch  was  a  log  structure  with  a  dirt  roof,  a  corral 
for  the  horses  near  by,  and  a  chicken-house  jabbed  against 
the  rear  of  the  ranch  house.  Inside  there  was  only  one  room, 
with  a  table,  three  or  four  chairs,  a  cooking- stove,  and 
three  bunks.  The  owners  were  Sylvane  and  Joe  Ferris  and 
William  J.  Merrifield.  Later  all  three  of  them  held  my 


IN  COWBOY  LAND  95 

commissions  while  I  was  President.  Merrifield  was  Mar 
shal  of  Montana,  and  as  Presidential  elector  cast  the  vote 
of  that  State  for  me  in  1904 ;  Sylvane  Ferris  was  Land  Offi 
cer  in  North  Dakota,  and  Joe  Ferris  Postmaster  at  Medora. 
There  was  a  fourth  man,  George  Meyer,  who  also  worked 
for  me  later.  That  evening  we  all  played  old  sledge  round 
the  table,  and  at  one  period  the  game  was  interrupted  by  a 
frightful  squawking  outside  which  told  us  that  a  bobcat  had 
made  a  raid  on  the  chicken-house. 

After  a  buffalo  hunt  with  my  original  friend,  Joe  Ferris, 
I  entered  into  partnership  with  Merrifield  and  Sylvane 
Ferris,  and  we  started  a  cow  ranch,  with  the  maltese  cross 
brand — always  known  as  "maltee  cross''  by  the  way,  as 
the  general  impression  along  the  Little  Missouri  was  that 
"maltese"  must  be  a  plural.  Twenty-nine  years  later  my 
four  friends  of  that  night  were  delegates  to  the  First  Pro 
gressive  National  Convention  at  Chicago.  They  were 
among  my  most  constant  companions  for  the  few  years  next 
succeeding  the  evening  when  the  bobcat  interrupted  the 
game  of  old  sledge.  I  lived  and  worked  with  them  on  the 
ranch,  and  with  them  and  many  others  like  them  on  the 
round-up ;  and  I  brought  out  from  Maine,  in  order  to  start 
the  Elkhorn  ranch  lower  down  the  river,  my  two  back 
woods  friends  Sewall  and  Dow.  My  brands  for  the  lower 
ranch  were  the  elkhorn  and  triangle. 

I  do  not  believe  there  ever  was  any  life  more  attractive 
to  a  vigorous  young  fellow  than  life  on  a  cattle  ranch  in 
those  days.  It  was  a  fine,  healthy  life,  too ;  it  taught  a  man 
self-reliance,  hardihood,  and  the  value  of  instant  decision 
— in  short,  the  virtues  that  ought  to  come  from  life  in  the 
open  country.  I  enjoyed  the  life  to  the  full.  After  the  first 
year  I  built  on  the  Elkhorn  ranch  a  long,  low  ranch  house  of 
hewn  logs,  with  a  veranda,  and  with,  in  addition  to  the  other 
rooms,  a  bedroom  for  myself,  and  a  sitting-room  with  a 
big  fire-place.  I  got  out  a  rocking-chair — I  am  very  fond  of 
rocking-chairs — and  enough  books  to  fill  two  or  three 
shelves,  and  a  rubber  bathtub  so  that  I  could  get  a  bath. 
And  then  I  do  not  see  how  any  one  could  have  lived  more 


96    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

comfortably.  We  had  buffalo  robes  and  bearskins  of  our 
own  killing.  We  always  kept  the  house  clean — using  the 
word  in  a  rather  large  sense.  There  were  at  least  two  rooms 
that  were  always  warm,  even  in  the  bitterest  weather ;  and 
we  had  plenty  to  eat.  Commonly  the  mainstay  of  every 
meal  was  game  of  our  own  killing,  usually  antelope  or  deer, 
sometimes  grouse  or  ducks,  and  occasionally,  in  the  earlier 
days,  buffalo  or  elk.  We  also  had  flour  and  bacon,  sugar, 
salt  and  canned  tomatoes.  And  later,  when  some  of  the  men 
married  and  brought  out  their  wives,  we  had  all  kinds  of 
good  things,  such  as  jams  and  jellies  made  from  the  wild 
plums  and  the  buffalo  berries,  and  potatoes  from  the  for 
lorn  little  garden  patch.  Moreover,  we  had  milk.  Most 
ranchmen  at  that  time  never  had  milk.  I  knew  more  than 
one  ranch  with  ten  thousand  head  of  cattle  where  there  was 
not  a  cow  that  could  be  milked.  We  made  up  our  minds 
that  we  would  be  more  enterprising.  Accordingly,  we 
started  to  domesticate  some  of  the  cows.  Our  first  effort 
was  not  successful,  chiefly  because  we  did  not  devote  the 
needed  time  and  patience  to  the  matter.  And  we  found 
that  to  race  a  cow  two  miles  at  full  speed  on  horseback,  then 
rope  her,  throw  her,  and  turn  her  upside  down  to  milk  her, 
while  exhilarating  as  a  pastime,  was  not  productive  of  re 
sults.  Gradually  we  accumulated  tame  cows,  and,  after  we 
had  thinned  out  the  bobcats  and  coyotes,  more  chickens. 

The  ranch  house  stood  on  the  brink  of  a  low  bluff  over 
looking  the  broad,  shallow  bed  of  the  Little  Missouri, 
through  which  at  most  seasons  there  ran  only  a  trickle  of 
water,  while  in  times  of  freshet  it  was  filled  brimful  with  the 
boiling,  foaming,  muddy  torrent.  There  was  no  neighbor 
for  ten  or  fifteen  miles  on  either  side  of  me.  The  river 
twisted  down  in  long  curves  between  narrow  bottoms 
bordered  by  sheer  cliff  walls,  for  the  Bad  Lands,  a  chaos  of 
peaks,  plateaus,  and  ridges,  rose  abruptly  from  the  edges 
of  the  level,  tree-clad,  or  grassy,  alluvial  meadows.  In 
front  of  the  ranch-house  veranda  was  a  row  of  cottonwood 
trees  with  gray-green  leaves  which  quivered  all  day  long 
if  there  was  a  breath  of  air.  From  these  trees  came  the 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  97 

far-away,  melancholy  cooing  of  mourning  doves,  and  little 
owls  perched  in  them  and  called  tremulously  at  night.  In 
the  long  summer  afternoons  we  would  sometimes  sit  on  the 
piazza,  when  there  was  no  work  to  be  done,  for  an  hour  or 
two  at  a  time,  watching  the  cattle  on  the  sand-bars,  and  the 
sharply  channeled  and  strangely  carved  amphitheater  of 
cliffs  across  the  bottom  opposite ;  while  the  vultures  wheeled 
overhead,  their  black  shadows  gliding  across  the  glaring 
white  of  the  dry  river-bed.  Sometimes  from  the  ranch  we 
saw  deer,  and  once  when  we  needed  meat  I  shot  one  across 
the  river  as  I  stood  on  the  piazza.  In  the  winter,  in  the 
days  of  iron  cold,  when  everything  was  white  under  the 
snow,  the  river  lay  in  its  bed  fixed  and  immovable  as  a 
bar  of  bent  steel,  and  then  at  night  wolves  and  lynxes 
traveled  up  and  down  it  as  if  it  had  been  a  highway  passing 
in  front  of  the  ranch  house.  Often  in  the  late  fall  or  early 
winter,  after  a  hard  day's  hunting,  or  when  returning  from 
one  of  the  winter  line  camps,  we  did  not  reach  the  ranch 
until  hours  after  sunset ;  and  after  the  weary  tramping  in 
the  cold  it  was  keen  pleasure  to  catch  the  first  red  gleam  of 
the  fire-lit  windows  across  the  snowy  wastes. 

The  Elkhorn  ranch  house  was  built  mainly  by  Sewall 
and  Dow,  who,  like  most  men  from  the  Maine  woods,  were 
mighty  with  the  ax.  I  could  chop  fairly  well  for  an  amateur, 
but  I  could  not  do  one-third  the  work  they  could.  One 
day  when  we  were  cutting  down  the  cottonwood  trees,  to 
begin  our  building  operations,  I  heard  some  one  ask  Dow 
what  the  total  cut  had  been,  and  Dow,  not  realizing  that  I 
was  within  hearing,  answered:  "Well,  Bill  cut  down  fifty- 
three,  I  cut  cut  forty-nine,  and  the  boss  he  beavered  down 
seventeen."  Those  who  have  seen  the  stump  of  a  tree 
which  has  been  gnawed  down  by  a  beaver  will  understand 
the  exact  force  of  the  comparison. 

In  those  days  on  a  cow  ranch  the  men  were  apt  to  be 
away  on  the  various  round-ups  at  least  half  the  time.  It 
was  interesting  and  exciting  work,  and  except  for  the  lack 
of  sleep  on  the  spring  and  summer  round-ups  it  was  not  ex 
hausting  work ;  compared  to  lumbering  or  mining  or  black- 


98    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

smithing,  to  sit  in  the  saddle  is  an  easy  form  of  labor.  The 
ponies  were  of  course  grass-fed  and  unshod.  Each  man  had 
his  own  string  of  nine  or  ten.  One  pony  would  be  used  for 
the  morning  work,  one  for  the  afternoon,  and  neither  would 
again  be  used  for  the  next  three  days.  A  separate  pony 
was  kept  for  night  riding. 

The  spring  and  early  summer  round-ups  were  especially 
for  the  branding  of  calves.  There  was  much  hard  work  and 
some  risk  on  a  round-up,  but  also  much  fun.  The  meeting- 
place  w£s  appointed  weeks  beforehand,  and  all  the  ranch 
men  of  the  territory  to  be  covered  by  the  round-up  sent 
their  representatives.  There  were  no  fences  in  the  West 
that  I  knew,  and  their  place  was  taken  by  the  cowboy  and 
the  branding-iron.  The  cattle  wandered  free.  Each  calf 
was  branded  with  the  brand  of  the  cow  it  was  following. 
Sometimes  in  winter  there  was  what  we  called  line  riding ; 
that  is,  camps  were  established  and  the  line  riders  traveled 
a  definite  beat  across  the  desolate  waste  of  snow,  to  and 
fro  from  one  camp  to  another,  to  prevent  the  cattle  from 
drifting.  But  as  a  rule  nothing  was  done  to  keep  the  cattle 
in  any  one  place.  In  the  spring  there  was  a  general  round 
up  in  each  locality.  Each  outfit  took  part  in  its  own  round 
up  and  all  the  outfits  of  a  given  region  combined  to  send 
representatives  to  the  two  or  three  round-ups  that  covered 
the  neighborhoods  near  by  into  which  their  cattle  might 
drift.  For  example,  our  Little  Missouri  round-up  generally 
worked  down  the  river  from  a  distance  of  some  fifty  or  sixty 
miles  above  my  ranch  towards  the  Kildeer  Mountains,  about 
the  same  distance  below.  In  addition  we  would  usually  send 
representatives  to  the  Yellowstone  round-up,  and  to  the 
round-up  along  the  upper  Little  Missouri,  and,  moreover, 
if  we  heard  that  cattle  had  drifted,  perhaps  towards  the 
Indian  reservation  southeast  of  us,  we  would  send  a  wagon 
and  rider  after  them. 

At  the  meeting-point,  which  might  be  in  the  valley  of  a 
half -dry  stream,  or  in  some  broad  bottom  of  the  river  itself, 
or  perchance  by  a  couple  of  ponds  under  some  queerly 
shaped  butte  that  was  a  landmark  for  the  region  round 


Copyright  by  Underwood  &  Underwood. 

PRESIDENT  THEODORE  ROOSEVELT  RETURNING  FROM  THE  BEAR  HUNT,  NEWCASTLE, 
COLORADO,  IN  1905. 


IN   COWBOY  LAND  99 

about,  we  would  all  gather  on  the  appointed  day.  The 
chuck- wagons,  containing  the  bedding  and  food,  each  drawn 
by  four  horses  and  driven  by  the  teamster  cook,  would  come 
jolting  and  rattling  over  the  uneven  sward.  Accompanying 
each  wagon  were  eight  or  ten  riders,  the  cow-punchers, 
while  their  horses,  a  band  of  a  hundred  or  so,  were  driven 
by  the  two  herders,  one  of  whom  was  known  as  the  day 
wrangler  and  one  as  the  night  wrangler.  The  men  were 
lean,  sinewy  fellows,  accustomed  to  riding  half-broken 
horses  at  any  speed  over  any  country  by  day  or  by  night. 
They  wore  flannel  shirts,  with  loose  handkerchiefs  knotted 
round  their  necks,  broad  hats,  high-heeled  boots  with  jin 
gling  spurs,  and  sometimes  leather  shaps,  although  often 
they  merely  had  their  trousers  tucked  into  the  tops  of  their 
high  boots.  There  was  a  good  deal  of  rough  horse-play, 
and,  as  with  any  other  gathering  of  men  or  boys  of  high 
animal  spirits,  the  horse-play  sometimes  became  very  rough 
indeed;  and  as  the  men  usually  carried  revolvers,  and  as 
there  were  occasionally  one  or  two  noted  gun-fighters  among 
them,  there  was  now  and  then  a  shooting  affray.  A  man 
who  was  a  coward  or  who  shirked  his  work  had  a  bad  time, 
of  course ;  a  man  could  not  afford  to  let  himself  be  bullied 
or  treated  as  a  butt ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  if  he  was  "look 
ing  for  a  fight/'  he  was  certain  to  find  it.  But  my  own 
experience  was  that  if  a  man  did  not  talk  until  his  associates 
knew  him  well  and  liked  him,  and  if  he  did  his  work,  he 
never  had  any  difficulty  in  getting  on.  In  my  own  round 
up  district  I  speedily  grew  to  be  friends  with  most  of  the 
men.  When  I  went  among  strangers  I  always  had  to  spend 
twenty-four  hours  in  living  down  the  fact  that  I  wore  spec 
tacles,  remaining  as  long  as  I  could  judiciously  deaf  to  any 
side  remarks  about  "four  eyes,"  unless  it  became  evident 
that  my  being  quiet  was  misconstrued  and  that  it  was  better 
to  bring  matters  to  a  head  at  once. 

If,  for  instance,  I  was  sent  off  to  represent  the  Little 
Missouri  brands  on  some  neighboring  round-up,  such  as  the 
Yellowstone,  I  usually  showed  that  kind  of  diplomacy  which 
consists  in  not  uttering  one  word  that  can  be  avoided. 


100    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT- AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

I  would  probably  have  a  couple  of  days'  solitary  ride, 
mounted  on  one  horse  and  driving  eight  or  ten  others  before 
me,  one  of  them  carrying  my  bedding.  Loose  horses  drive 
best  at  a  trot,  or  canter,  and  if  a  man  is  traveling  alone 
in  this  fashion  it  is  a  good  thing  to  have  them  reach  the 
camp  ground  sufficiently  late  to  make  them  desire  to  feed 
and  sleep  where  they  are  until  morning.  In  consequence 
I  never  spent  more  than  two  days  on  the  journey  from  what 
ever  the  point  was  at  which  I  left  the  Little  Missouri,  sleep 
ing  the  one  night  for  as  limited  a  number  of  hours  as 
possible. 

As  soon  as  I  reached  the  meeting-place  I  would  find  out 
the  wagon  to  which  I  was  assigned.  Eiding  to  it,  I  turned 
my  horses  into  the  saddle-band  and  reported  to  the  wagon 
boss,  or,  in  his  absence,  to  the  cook — always  a  privileged 
character,  who  was  allowed  and  expected  to  order  men 
around.  He  would  usually  grumble  savagely  and  pro 
fanely  about  my  having  been  put  with  his  wagon,  but  this 
was  merely  conventional  on  his  part ;  and  if  I  sat  down  and 
said  nothing  he  would  probably  soon  ask  me  if  I  wanted 
anything  to  eat,  to  which  the  correct  answer  was  that  I  was 
not  hungry  and  would  wait  until  meal-time.  The  bedding 
rolls  of  the  riders  would  be  strewn  round  the  grassland  I 
would  put  mine  down  a  little  outside  the  ring,  where  I  would 
not  be  in  any  one 's  way,  with  my  six  or  eight  branding-irons 
beside  it.  The  men  would  ride  in,  laughing  and  talking 
with  one  another,  and  perhaps  nodding  to  me.  One  of 
their  number,  usually  the  wagon  foreman,  might  put  some 
question  to  me  as  to  what  brands  I  represented,  but  no 
other  word  would  be  addressed  to  me,  nor  would  I  be  ex 
pected  to  volunteer  any  conversation.  Supper  would  con 
sist  of  bacon,  Dutch  oven  bread,  and  possibly  beef ;  once  I 
won  the  good  graces  of  my  companions  at  the  outset  by 
appearing  with  two  antelope  which  I  had  shot.  After  sup 
per  I  would  roll  up  in  my  bedding  as  soon  as  possible,  and 
the  others  would  follow  suit  at  their  pleasure. 

At  three  in  the  morning  or  thereabouts,  at  a  yell  from  the 
cook,  all  hands  would  turn  hurriedly  out.  Dressing  was  a 


IN  COWBOY  LAND  101 

simple  affair.  Then  each  man  rolled  and  corded  his  bedding 
— if  he  did  not,  the  cook  would  leave  it  behind  and  he  would 
go  without  any  for  the  rest  of  the  trip — and  came  to  the 
fire,  where  he  picked  out  a  tin  cup,  tin  plate,  and  knife  and 
fork,  helped  himself  to  coffee  and  to  whatever  food  there 
was,  and  ate  it  standing  or  squatting  as  best  suited  him. 
Dawn  was  probably  breaking  by  this  time,  and  the  trampling 
of  unshod  hoofs  showed  that  the  night  wrangler  was  bring 
ing  in  the  pony  herd.  Two  of  the  men  would  then  run 
ropes  from  the  wagon  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  and 
into  this  as  a  corral  the  horses  would  be  driven.  Each  man 
might  rope  one  of  his  own  horses,  or  more  often  point  it  out 
to  the  most  skillful  roper  of  the  outfit,  who  would  rope  it 
for  him — for  if  the  man  was  an  unskillful  roper  and  roped 
the  wrong  horse  or  roped  the  horse  in  the  wrong  place  there 
was  a  chance  of  the  whole  herd  stampeding.  Each  man 
then  saddled  and  bridled  his  horse.  This  was  usually  fol 
lowed  by  some  resolute  bucking  on  the  part  of  two  or  three 
of  the  horses,  especially  in  the  early  days  of  each  round-up. 
The  bucking  was  always  a  source  of  amusement  to  all  the 
men  whose  horses  did  not  buck,  and  these  fortunate  ones 
would  gather  round  giving  ironical  advice,  and  especially 
adjuring  the  rider  not  to  "go  to  leather" — that  is,  not  to 
steady  himself  in  the  saddle  by  catching  hold  of  the  saddle- 
horn. 

As  soon  as  the  men  had  mounted,  the  whole  outfit  started 
on  the  long  circle,  the  morning  circle.  Usually  the  ranch 
foreman  who  bossed  a  given  wagon  was  put  in  charge  of  the 
men  of  one  group  by  the  round-up  foreman ;  he  might  keep 
his  men  together  until  they  had  gone  some  ten  or  fifteen 
miles  from  camp,  and  then  drop  them  in  couples  at  different 
points.  Each  couple  made  its  way  toward  the  wagon, 
gathering  all  the  cattle  it  could  find.  The  morning's  ride 
might  last  six  or  eight  hours,  and  it  was  still  longer  before 
some  of  the  men  got  in.  Singly  and  in  twos  and  threes  they 
appeared  from  every  quarter  of  the  horizon,  the  dust  rising 
from  the  hoofs  of  the  steers  and  bulls,  the  cows  and  calves, 
they  had  collected.  Two  or  three  of  the  men  were  left  to 


102    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

take  care  of  the  herd  while  the  others  changed  horses,  ate  a 
hasty  dinner,  and  then  came  out  to  the  afternoon  work. 
This  consisted  of  each  man  in  succession  being  sent  into  the 
herd,  usually  with  a  companion,  to  cut  out  the  cows  of  his 
brand  or  brands  which  were  followed  by  unbranded  calves, 
and  also  to  cut  out  any  mavericks  or  unbranded  yearlings. 
We  worked  each  animal  gently  out  to  the  edge  of  the  herd, 
and  then  with  a  sudden  dash  took  it  off  at  a  run.  It  was 
always  desperately  anxious  to  break  back  and  rejoin  the 
herd.  There  was  much  breakneck  galloping  and  twisting 
and  turning  before  its  desire  was  thwarted  and  it  was 
driven  to  join  the  rest  of  the  cut — that  is,  the  other  animals 
which  had  been  cut  out,  and  which  were  being  held  by  one  or 
two  other  men.  Cattle  hate  being  alone,  and  it  was  no  easy 
matter  to  hold  the  first  one  or  two  that  were  cut  out;  but 
soon  they  got  a  little  herd  of  their  own,  and  then  they  were 
contented.  When  the  cutting  out  had  all  been  done,  the 
calves  were  branded,  and  all  misadventures  of  the  "calf 
wrestlers, "  the  men  who  seized,  threw,  and  held  each  calf 
when  roped  by  the  mounted  roper,  were  hailed  with  yelling 
laughter.  Then  the  animals  which  for  one  reason  or  an 
other  it  was  desired  to  drive  along  with  the  round-up  were 
put  into  one  herd  and  left  in  charge  of  a  couple  of  night 
guards,  and  the  rest  of  us  would  loaf  back  to  the  wagon  for 
supper  and  bed. 

By  this  time  I  would  have  been  accepted  as  one  of  the 
rest  of  the  outfit,  and  all  strangeness  would  have  passed  off, 
the  attitude  of  my  fellow  cow-punchers  being  one  of  friendly 
forgiveness  even  toward  my  spectacles.  Night  guards  for 
the  cattle  herd  were  then  assigned  by  the  captain  of  the 
wagon,  or  perhaps  by  the  round-up  foreman,  according  to 
the  needs  of  the  case,  the  guards  standing  for  two  hours  at 
a  time  from  eight  in  the  evening  till  four  in  the  morning. 
The  first  and  last  watches  were  preferable,  because  sleep 
was  not  broken  as  in  both  of  the  other  two.  If  things 
went  well,  the  cattle  would  soon  bed  down  and  nothing 
further  would  occur  until  morning,  when  there  was  a  repe- 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  103 

tition  of  the  work,  the  wagon  moving  each  day  eight  or  ten 
miles  to  some  appointed  camping-place. 

Each  man  would  picket  his  night  horse  near  the  wagon, 
usually  choosing  the  quietest  animal  in  his  string  for  that 
purpose,  because  to  saddle  and  mount  a  "mean"  horse  at 
night  is  not  pleasant.  When  utterly  tired,  it  was  hard  to 
have  to  get  up  for  one 's  trick  at  night  herd.  Nevertheless, 
on  ordinary  nights  the  two  hours  round  the  cattle  in  the  still 
darkness  were  pleasant.  The  loneliness,  under  the  vast 
empty  sky,  and  the  silence,  in  which  the  breathing  of  the 
cattle  sounded  loud,  and  the  alert  readiness  to  meet  any 
emergency  which  might  suddenly  arise  out  of  the  formless 
night,  all  combined  to  give  one  a  sense  of  subdued  interest. 
Then,  one  soon  got  to  know  the  cattle  of  marked  individ 
uality,  the  ones  that  led  the  others  into  mischief;  and  one 
also  grew  to  recognize  the  traits  they  all  possessed  in  com 
mon,  and  the  impulses  which,  for  instance,  made  a  whole 
herd  get  up  towards  midnight,  each  beast  turning  round 
and  then  lying  down  again.  But  by  the  end  of  the  watch 
each  rider  had  studied  the  cattle  until  it  grew  monotonous, 
and  heartily  welcomed  his  relief  guard.  A  newcomer,  of 
course,  had  any  amount  to  learn,  and  sometimes  the  sim 
plest  things  were  those  which  brought  him  to  grief. 

One  night  early  in  my  career  I  failed  satisfactorily  to 
identify  the  direction  in  which  I  was  to  go  in  order  to  reach 
the  night  herd.  It  was  a  pitch-dark  night.  I  managed  to 
get  started  wrong,  and  I  never  found  either  the  herd  or  the 
wagon  again  until  sunrise,  when  I  was  greeted  with  wither 
ing  scorn  toy  the  injured  cow-puncher,  who  had  been  obliged 
to  stand  double  guard  because  I  failed  to  relieve  him. 

There  were  other  misadventures  that  I  met  with  where 
the  excuse  was  greater.  The  punchers  on  night  guard 
usually  rode  round  the  cattle  in  reverse  directions ;  calling 
and  singing  to  them  if  the  beasts  seemed  restless,  to  keep 
them  quiet.  On  rare  occasions  something  happened  that 
made  the  cattle  stampede,  and  then  the  duty  of  the  riders 
was  to  keep  with  them  as  long  as  possible  and  try  gradually 
to  get  control  of  them. 


104    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

One  night  there  was  a  heavy  storm,  and  all  of  us  who  were 
at  the  wagons  were  obliged  to  turn  out  hastily  to  help  the 
night  herders.  After  a  while  there  was  a  terrific  peal  of 
thunder,  the  lightning  struck  right  by  the  herd,  and  away  all 
the  beasts  went,  heads  and  horns  and  tails  in  the  air.  For  a 
minute  or  two  I  could  make  out  nothing  except  the  dark 
forms  of  the  beasts  running  on  every  side  of  me,  and  I 
should  have  been  very  sorry  if  my  horse  had  stumbled,  for 
those  behind  would  have  trodden  me  down.  Then  the  herd 
split,  part  going  to  one  side,  while  the  other  part  seemingly 
kept  straight  ahead,  and  I  galloped  as  hard  as  ever  beside 
them.  I  was  trying  to  reach  the  point — the  leading  animals 
— in  order  to  turn  them,  when  suddenly  there  was  a  tre 
mendous  splashing  in  front.  I  could  dimly  make  out  that 
the  cattle  immediately  ahead  and  to  one  side  of  me  were 
disappearing,  and  the  next  moment  the  horse  and  I  went 
off  a  cut  bank  into  the  Little  Missouri.  I  bent  away  back 
in  the  saddle,  and  though  the  horse  almost  went  down  he 
just  recovered  himself,  and,  plunging  and  struggling 
through  water  and  quicksand,  we  made  the  other  side.  Here 
I  discovered  that  there  was  another  cowboy  with  the  same 
part  of  the  herd  that  I  was  with;  but  almost  immediately 
we  separated.  I  galloped  hard  through  a  bottom  covered 
with  big  cottonwood  trees,  and  stopped  the  part  of  the  herd 
that  I  was  with,  but  very  soon  they  broke  on  me  again,  and 
repeated  this  twice.  Finally  toward  morning  the  few  I  had 
left  came  to  a  halt. 

It  had  been  raining  hard  for  some  time.  I  got  off  my 
horse  and  leaned  against  a  tree,  but  before  long  the  infernal 
cattle  started  on  again,  and  I  had  to  ride  after  them.  Dawn 
came  soon  after  this,  and  I  was  able  to  make  out  where  I 
was  and  head  the  cattle  back,  collecting  other  little  bunches 
as  I  went.  After  a  while  I  came  on  a  cowboy  on  foot  carry 
ing  his  saddle  on  his  head.  He  was  my  companion  of  the 
previous  night.  His  horse  had  gone  full  speed  into  a  tree 
and  killed  itself,  the  man,  however,  not  being  hurt.  I  could 
not  help  him,  as  I  had  all  I  could  do  to  handle  the  cattle. 
When  I  got  them  to  the  wagon,  most  of  the  other  men  had 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  105 

already  come  in  and  the  riders  were  just  starting  on  the 
long  circle.  One  of  the  men  changed  my  horse  for  me  while 
I  ate  a  hasty  breakfast  and  then  we  were  off  for  the  day's 
work. 

As  only  about  half  of  the  night  herd  had  been  brought 
back,  the  circle  riding  was  particularly  heavy,  and  it  was 
ten  hours  before  we  were  back  at  the  wagon.  We  then 
changed  horses  again  and  worked  the  whole  herd  until  after 
sunset,  finishing  just  as  it  grew  too  dark  to  do  anything 
more.  By  this  time  I  had  been  nearly  forty  hours  in  the 
saddle,  changing  horses  five  times,  and  my  clothes  had 
thoroughly  dried  on  me,  and  I  fell  asleep  as  soon  as  I 
touched  the  bedding.  Fortunately  some  men  who  had  gotten 
in  late  in  the  morning  had  had  their  sleep  during  the  day 
time,  so  that  the  rest  of  us  escaped  night  guard  and  were 
not  called  until  four  next  morning.  Nobody  ever  gets 
enough  sleep  on  a  round-up. 

The  above  was  the  longest  number  of  consecutive  hours 
I  ever  had  to  be  in  the  saddle.  But,  as  I  have  said,  I  changed 
horses  five  times,  and  it  is  a  great  lightening  of  labor  for  a 
rider  to  have  a  fresh  horse.  Once  when  with  Sylvane 
Ferris  I  spent  about  sixteen  hours  on  one  horse,  riding 
seventy  or  eighty  miles.  The  round-up  had  reached  a  place 
called  the  ox-bow  of  the  Little  Missouri,  and  we  had  to  ride 
there,  do  some  work  around  the  cattle,  and  ride  back. 

Another  time  I  was  twenty-four  hours  on  horseback  in 
company  with  Merrifield  without  changing  horses.  On  this 
occasion  we  did  not  travel  fast.  We  had  been  coming  back 
with  the  wagon  from  a  hunting  trip  in  the  Big  Horn  Moun 
tains.  The  team  was  fagged  out,  and  we  were  tired  of 
walking  at  a  snail's  pace  beside  it.  When  we  reached  coun 
try  that  the  driver  thoroughly  knew,  we  thought  it  safe  to 
leave  him,  and  we  loped  in  one  night  across  a  distance  which 
it  took  the  wagon  the  three  following  days  to  cover.  It  was 
a  beautiful  moonlight  night,  and  the  ride  was  delightful. 
All  day  long  we  had  plodded  at  a  walk,  weary  and  hot.  At 
supper  time  we  had  rested  two  or  three  hours,  and  the  tough 
little  riding  horses  seemed  as  fresh  as  ever.  It  was  in 


106    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

September.  As  we  rode  out  of  the  circle  of  the  firelight, 
the  air  was  cool  in  our  faces.  Under  the  bright  moonlight, 
and  then  under  the  starlight,  we  loped  and  cantered  mile 
after  mile  over  the  high  prairie.  We  passed  bands  of  ante 
lope  and  herds  of  long-horn  Texas  cattle,  and  at  last,  just  as 
the  first  red  beams  of  the  sun  flamed  over  the  bluffs  in  front 
of  us,  we  rode  down  into  the  valley  of  the  Little  Missouri, 
where  our  ranch  house  stood. 

I  never  became  a  good  roper,  nor  more  than  an  average 
rider,  according  to  ranch  standards.  Of  course  a  man  on  a 
ranch  has  to  ride  a  good  many  bad  horses,  and  is  bound  to 
encounter  a  certain  number  of  accidents,  and  of  these  I  had 
my  share,  at  one  time  cracking  a  rib,  and  on  another  occa 
sion  the  point  of  my  shoulder.  We  were  hundreds  of  miles 
from  a  doctor,  and  each  time,  as  I  was  on  the  round-up,  I 
had  to  get  through  my  work  for  the  next  few  weeks  as  best 
I  could,  until  the  injury  healed  of  itself.  When  I  had  the 
opportunity  I  broke  my  own  horses,  doing  it  gently  and 
gradually  and  spending  much  time  over  it,  and  choosing 
the  horses  that  seemed  gentle  to  begin  with.  With  these 
horses  I  never  had  any  difficulty.  But  frequently  there  was 
neither  time  nor  opportunity  to  handle  our  mounts  so  elab 
orately.  We  might  get  a  band  of  horses,  each  having  been 
bridled  and  saddled  two  or  three  times,  but  none  of  them 
having  been  broken  beyond  the  extent  implied  in  this 
bridling  and  saddling.  Then  each  of  us  in  succession  would 
choose  a  horse  (for  his  string),  I  as  owner  of  the  ranch  be 
ing  given  the  first  choice  on  each  round,  so  to  speak.  The 
first  time  I  was  ever  on  a  round-up  Sylvane  Ferris,  Merri- 
field,  Meyer,  and  I  each  chose  his  string  in  this  fashion. 
Three  or  four  of  the  animals  I  got  were  not  easy  to  ride. 
The  effort  both  to  ride  them  and  to  look  as  if  I  enjoyed  do 
ing  so,  on  some  cool  morning  when  my  grinning  cowboy 
friends  had  gathered  round  "to  see  whether  the  high-headed 
bay  could  buck  the  boss  off,"  doubtless  was  of  benefit  to 
me,  but  lacked  much  of  being  enjoyable.  The  time  I  smashed 
my  rib  I  was  bucked  off  on  a  stone.  The  time  I  hurt  the 
point  of  my  shoulder  I  was  riding  a  big,  sulky  horse  named 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  107 

Ben  Butler,  which  went  over  backwards  with  me.  When 
we  got  up  it  still  refused  to  go  anywhere ;  so  while  I  sat  it, 
Sylvane  Ferris  and  George  Meyer  got  their  ropes  on  its 
neck  and  dragged  it  a  few  hundred  yards,  choking  but  stub 
born,  all  four  feet  firmly  planted  and  plowing  the  ground. 
When  they  released  the  ropes  it  lay  down  and  wouldn't  get 
up.  The  round-up  had  started;  so  Sylvane  gave  me  his 
horse,  Baldy,  which  sometimes  bucked  but  never  went  over 
backwards,  and  he  got  on  the  now  rearisen  Ben  Butler.  To 
my  discomfiture  Ben  started  quietly  beside  us,  while  Syl 
vane  remarked,  "Why,  there's  nothing  the  matter  with  this 
horse,  he's  a  plumb  gentle  horse."  Then  Ben  fell  slightly 
behind  and  I  heard  Sylvane  again,  "That's  all  right !  Come 
along!  Here,  you!  Go  on,  you!  Hi,  hi,  fellows,  help  me 
out!  he's  lying  on  me!"  Sure  enough,  he  was;  and  when 
we  dragged  Sylvane  from  under  him  the  first  thing  the 
rescued  Sylvane  did  was  to  execute  a  war-dance,  spurs  and 
all,  on  the  iniquitous  Ben.  We  could  do  nothing  with  him 
that  day;  subsequently  we  got  him  so  that  we  could  ride 
him ;  but  he  never  became  a  nice  saddle-horse. 

As  with  all  other  forms  of  work,  so  on  the  round-up,  a 
man  of  ordinary  power,  who  nevertheless  does  not  shirk 
things  merely  because  they  are  disagreeable  or  irksome, 
soon  earns  his  place.  There  were  crack  riders  and  ropers 
who,  just  because  they  felt  such  overweening  pride  in  their 
own  prowess,  were  not  really  very  valuable  men.  Contin 
ually  on  the  circles  a  cow  or  a  calf  would  get  into  some  thick 
patch  of  bulberry  bush  and  refuse  to  come  out ;  or  when  it 
was  getting  late  we  would  pass  some  bad  lands  that  would 
probably  not  contain  cattle,  but  might,  or  a  steer  would  turn 
fighting  mad,  or  a  calf  grow  tired  and  want  to  lie  down. 
If  in  such  a  case  the  man  steadily  persists  in  doing  the  un 
attractive  thing,  and  after  two  hours  of  exasperation  and 
harassment  does  finally  get  the  cow  out,  and  keep  her  out, 
of  the  bulberry  bushes,  and  drives  her  to  the  wagon,  or 
finds  some  animals  that  have  been  passed  by  in  the  fourth 
or  fifth  patch  of  bad  lands  he  hunts  through,  or  gets  the  calf 
up  on  his  saddle  and  takes  it  in  anyhow,  the  foreman  soon 


108    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

grows  to  treat  Mm  as  having  his  uses  and  as  being  an  asset 
of  worth  in  the  round-up,  even  though  neither  a  fancy  roper 
nor  a  fancy  rider. 

When  at  the  Progressive  Convention  last  August,  I  met 
George  Meyer  for  the  first  time  in  many  years,  and  he  re 
called  to  me  an  incident  on  one  round-up  where  we  happened 
to  be  thrown  together  while  driving  some  cows  and  calves  to 
camp.  When  the  camp  was  only  just  across  the  river,  two 
of  the  calves  positively  refused  to  go  any  further.  He  took 
one  of  them  in  his  arms,  and  after  some  hazardous  maneuv 
ering  managed  to  get  on  his  horse,  in  spite  of  the  objections 
of  the  latter,  and  rode  into  the  river.  My  calf  was  too  big 
for-  such  treatment,  so  in  despair  I  roped  it,  intending  to 
drag  it  over.  However,  as  soon  as  I  roped  it,  the  calf 
started  bouncing  and  bleating,  and,  owing  to  some  lack  of 
dexterity  on  my  part,  suddenly  swung  round  the  rear  of  the 
horse,  bringing  the  rope  under  his  tail.  Down  went  the 
tail  tight,  and  the  horse  "went  into  figures,"  as  the  cow- 
puncher  phrase  of  that  day  was.  There  was  a  cut  bank 
about  four  feet  high  on  the  hither  side  of  the  river,  and  over 
this  the  horse  bucked.  We  went  into  the  water  with  a 
splash.  With  a  ' '  pluck ' '  the  calf  followed,  described  a  para 
bola  in  the  air,  and  landed  beside  us.  Fortunately,  this  took 
the  rope  out  from  under  the  horse 's  tail,  but  left  him  thor 
oughly  frightened.  He  could  not  do  much  bucking  in  the 
stream,  for  there  were  one  or  two  places  where  we  had  to 
swim,  and  the  shallows  were  either  sandy  or  muddy;  but 
across  we  went,  at  speed,  and  the  calf  made  a  wake  like 
Pharaoh's  army  in  the  Eed  Sea. 

On  several  occasions  we  had  to  fight  fire.  In  the  geog 
raphy  books  of  my  youth  prairie  fires  were  always  por 
trayed  as  taking  place  in  long  grass,  and  all  living  things 
ran  before  them.  On  the  Northern  cattle  plains  the  grass 
was  never  long  enough  to  be  a  source  of  danger  to  man  or 
beast.  The  fires  were  nothing  like  the  forest  fires  in  the 
Northern  woods.  But  they  destroyed  large  quantities  of 
feed,  and  we  had  to  stop  them  where  possible.  The  process 
we  usually  followed  was  to  kill  a  steer,  split  it  in  two  length- 


IN    COWBOY   LAND  109 

wise,  and  then  have  two  riders  drag  each  half-steer,  the 
rope  of  one  running  from  the  saddle-horn  to  the  front  leg, 
and  that  of  the  other  to  the  hind  leg.  One  of  the  men  would 
spur  this  horse  over  or  through  the  line  of  fire,  and  the  two 
would  then  ride  forward,  dragging  the  steer  bloody  side 
downward  along  the  line  of  flame,  men  following  on  foot 
with  slickers  or  wet  horse-blankets  to  beat  out  any  flickering 
blaze  that  was  still  left.  It  was  exciting  work,  for  the  fire 
and  the  twitching  and  plucking  of  the  ox  carcass  over  the 
uneven  ground  maddened  the  fierce  little  horses  so  that  it 
was  necessary  to  do  some  riding  in  order  to  keep  them  to 
their  work.  After  a  while  it  also  became  very  exhausting, 
the  thirst  and  fatigue  being  great,  as,  with  parched  lips  and 
blackened  from  head  to  foot,  we  toiled  at  our  task. 

In  those  years  the  Stockman's  Association  of  Montana 
was  a  powerful  body.  I  was  the  delegate  to  it  from  the 
Little  Missouri.  The  meetings  that  I  attended  were  held  in 
Miles  City,  at  that  time  a  typical  cow  town.  Stockmen  of 
all  kinds  attended,  including  the  biggest  men  in  the  stock 
business,  men  like  old  Conrad  Kohrs,  who  was  and  is  the 
finest  type  of  pioneer  in  all  the  Eocky  Mountain  country; 
and  Granville  Stewart,  who  was  afterwards  appointed  Min 
ister  by  Cleveland,  I  think  to  the  Argentine;  and  "Hash- 
knife"  Simpson,  a  Texan  who  had  brought  his  cattle,  the 
Hashknife  brand,  up  the  trail  into  our  country.  He  and 
I  grew  to  be  great  friends.  I  can  see  him  now  the  first  time 
we  met,  grinning  at  me  as,  none  too  comfortable,  I  sat  a 
half-broken  horse  at  the  edge  of  a  cattle  herd  we  were  work 
ing.  His  son  Sloan  Simpson  went  to  Harvard,  was  one  of 
the  first-class  men  in  my  regiment,  and  afterwards  held  my 
commission  as  Postmaster  at  Dallas. 

At  the  stockmen's  meeting  in  Miles  City,  in  addition  to 
the  big  stockmen,  there  were  always  hundreds  of  cowboys 
galloping  up  and  down  the  wide  dusty  streets  at  every  hour 
of  the  day  and  night.  It  was  a  picturesque  sight  during  the 
three  days  the  meetings  lasted.  There  was  always  at  least 
one  big  dance  at  the  hotel.  There  were  few  dress  suits,  but 
there  was  perfect  decorum  at  the  dance,  and  in  the  square 


110    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

dances  most  of  the  men  knew  the  figures  far  better  than  I 
did.  With  such  a  crowd  in  town,  sleeping  accommodations 
of  any  sort  were  at  a  premium,  and  in  the  hotel  there  were 
two  men  in  every  bed.  On  one  occasion  I  had  a  roommate 
whom  I  never  saw,  because  he  always  went  to  bed  much 
later  than  I  did  and  I  always  got  up  much  earlier  than  he 
did.  On  the  last  day,  however,  he  rose  at  the  same  time  and 
I  saw  that  he  was  a  man  I  knew  named  Carter,  and  nick 
named  "Modesty"  Carter.  He  was  a  stalwart,  good- 
looking  fellow,  and  I  was  sorry  when  later  I  heard  that  he 
had  been  killed  in  a  shooting  row. 

When  I  went  West,  the  last  great  Indian  wars  had  just 
come  to  an  end,  but  there  were  still  sporadic  outbreaks 
here  and  there,  and  occasionally  bands  of  marauding  young 
braves  were  a  menace  to  outlying  and  lonely  settlements. 
Many  of  the  white  men  were  themselves  lawless  and  bru 
tal,  and  prone  to  commit  outrages  on  the  Indians.  Unfor 
tunately,  each  race  tended  to  hold  all  the  member  of  the 
other  race  responsible  for  the  misdeeds  of  a  few,  so  that  the 
crime  of  the  miscreant,  red  or  white,  who  committed  the 
original  outrage  too  often  invited  retaliation  upon  entirely 
innocent  people,  and  this  action  would  in  its  turn  arouse 
bitter  feeling  which  found  vent  in  still  more  indiscriminate 
retaliation.  The  first  year  I  was  on  the  Little  Missouri 
some  Sioux  bucks  ran  off  all  the  horses  of  a  buffalo-hunter 's 
outfit.  One  of  the  buffalo-hunters  tried  to  get  even  by 
stealing  the  horses  of  a  Cheyenne  hunting  party,  and  when 
pursued  made  for  a  cow  camp,  with,  as  a  result,  a  long- 
range  skirmish  between  the  cowboys  and  the  Cheyennes. 
One  of  the  latter  was  wounded ;  but  this  particular  wounded 
man  seemed  to  have  more  sense  than  the  other  participants 
in  the  chain  of  wrong-doing,  and  discriminated  among  the 
whites.  He  came  into  our  camp  and  had  his  wound  dressed. 

A  year  later  I  was  at  a  desolate  little  mud  road  ranch  on 
the  Deadwood  trail.  It  was  kept  by  a  very  capable  and 
very  forceful  woman,  with  sound  ideas  of  justice  and  abun 
dantly  well  able  to  hold  her  own.  Her  husband  was  a  worth 
less  devil,  who  finally  got  drunk  on  some  whisky  he  ob- 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  111 

tained  from  an  outfit  of  Missouri  bull-whackers — that  is, 
freighters,  driving  ox  wagons.  Under  the  stimulus  of  the 
whisky  he  picked  a  quarrel  with  his  wife  and  attempted  to 
beat  her.  She  knocked  him  down  with  a  stove-lid  lifter, 
and  the  admiring  bull-whackers  bore  him  off,  leaving  the 
lady  in  full  possession  of  the  ranch.  When  I  visited  her 
she  had  a  man  named  Crow  Joe  working  for  her,  a  slab- 
sided,  shifty-eyed  person  who  later,  as  I  heard  my  foreman 
explain,  "skipped  the  country  with  a  bunch  of  horses." 
The  mistress  of  the  ranch  made  first-class  buckskin  shirts 
of  great  durability.  The  one  she  made  for  me,  and  which  I 
used  for  years,  was  used  by  one  of  my  sons  in  Arizona  a 
couple  of  winters  ago.  I  had  ridden  down  into  the  country 
after  some  lost  horses,  and  visited  the  ranch  to  get  her  to 
make  me  the  buckskin  shirt  in  question.  There  were,  at  the 
moment,  three  Indians  there,  Sioux,  well  behaved  and  self- 
respecting,  and  she  explained  to  me  that  they  had  been 
resting  there  waiting  for  dinner,  and  that  a  white  man  had 
come  along  and  tried  to  run  off  their  horses.  The  Indians 
were  on  the  lookout,  however,  and,  running  out,  they  caught 
the  man;  but,  after  retaking  their  horses  and  depriving 
him  of  his  gun,  they  let  him  go.  "I  don't  see  why  they  let 
him  go, ' '  exclaimed  my  hostess.  '  '  I  don 't  believe  in  stealing 
Indians'  horses  any  more  than  white  folks';  so  I  told  'em 
they  could  go  along  and  hang  him — I'd  never  cheep.  Ajiy- 
how,  I  won't  charge  them  anything  for  their  dinner,"  con 
cluded  my  hostess.  She  was  in  advance  of  the  usual  moral 
ity  of  the  time  and  place,  which  drew  a  sharp  line  between 
stealing  citizens'  horses  and  stealing  horses  from  the  Gov 
ernment  or  the  Indians. 

A  fairly  decent  citizen,  Jap  Hunt,  who  long  ago  met  a 
violent  death,  exemplified  this  attitude  towards  Indians  in 
some  remarks  I  once  heard  him  make.  He  had  started  a 
horse  ranch,  and  had  quite  honestly  purchased  a  number  of 
broken-down  horses  of  different  brands,  with  the  view  of 
doctoring  them  and  selling  them  again.  About  this  time 
there  had  been  much  horse-stealing  and  cattle-killing  in  our 
Territory  and  in  Montana,  and  under  the  direction  of  some 


112    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

of  the  big  cattle-growers  a  committee  of  vigilantes  had  been 
organized  to  take  action  against  the  rustlers,  as  the  horse 
thieves  and  cattle  thieves  were  called.  The  vigilantes,  or 
stranglers,  as  they  were  locally  known,  did  their  work  thor 
oughly;  but,  as  always  happens  with  bodies  of  the  kind, 
toward  the  end  they  grew  reckless  in  their  actions,  paid  off 
private  grudges,  and  hung  men  on  slight  provocation. 
Eiding  into  Jap  Hunt's  ranch,  they  nearly  hung  him  be 
cause  he  had  so  many  horses  of  different  brands.  He  was 
finally  let  off.  He  was  much  upset  by  the  incident,  and 
explained  again  and  again,  '  *  The  idea  of  saying  that  I  was 
a  horse  thief!  Why,  I  never  stole  a  horse  in  my  life — 
leastways  from  a  white  man.  I  don't  count  Indians  nor 
the  Government,  of  course."  Jap  had  been  reared  among 
men  still  in  the  stage  of  tribal  morality,  and  while  they  rec 
ognized  their  obligations  to  one  another,  both  the  Govern 
ment  and  the  Indians  seemed  alien  bodies,  in  regard  to 
which  the  laws  of  morality  did  not  apply. 

On  the  other  hand,  parties  of  savage  young  bucks  would 
treat  lonely  settlers  just  as  badly,  and  in  addition  some 
times  murder  them.  Such  a  party  was  generally  composed 
of  young  fellows  burning  to  distinguish  themselves.  Some 
one  of  their  number  would  have  obtained  a  pass  from  the 
Indian  Agent  allowing  him  to  travel  off  the  reservation, 
which  pass  would  be  flourished  whenever  their  action  was 
questioned  by  bodies  of  whites  of  equal  strength.  I  once 
had  a  trifling  encounter  with  such  a  band.  I  was  making 
my  way  along  the  edge  of  the  bad  lands,  northward  from 
my  lower  ranch,  and  was  just  crossing  a  plateau  when  five 
Indians  rode  up  over  the  further  rim.  The  instant  they  saw 
me  they  whipped  out  their  guns  and  raced  full  speed  at  me, 
yelling  and  flogging  their  horses.  I  was  on  a  favorite  horse, 
Manitou,  who  was  a  wise  old  fellow,  with  nerves  not  to  be 
shaken  by  anything.  I  at  once  leaped  off  him  and  stood 
with  my  rifle  ready. 

It  was  possible  that  the  Indians  were  merely  making  a 
bluff  and  intended  no  mischief.  But  I  did  not  like  their 
actions,  and  I  thought  it  likely  that  if  I  allowed  them  to 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  113 

get  hold  of  me  they  would  at  least  take  my  horse  and  rifle, 
and  possibly  kill  me.  So  I  waited  until  they  were  a  hundred 
yards  off  and  then  drew  a  bead  on  the  first  Indians — and, 
for  the  matter  of  that,  white  men — do  not  like  to  ride  in  on 
a  man  who  is  cool  and  means  shooting,  and  in  a  twinkling 
every  man  was  lying  over  the  side  of  his  horse,  and  all  five 
had  turned  and  were  galloping  backwards,  having  altered 
their  course  as  quickly  as  so  many  teal  ducks. 

After  this  one  of  them  made  the  peace  sign,  with  his 
blanket  first,  and  then,  as  he  rode  toward  me,  with  his  open 
hand.  I  halted  him  at  a  fair  distance  and  asked  him  what 
he  wanted.  He  exclaimed,  "How !  Me  good  Injun,  me  good 
Injun,"  and  tried  to  show  me  the  dirty  piece  of  paper  on 
which  his  agency  pass  was  written.  I  told  him  with  sin 
cerity  that  I  was  glad  that  he  was  a  good  Indian,  but  that 
he  must  not  come  any  closer.  He  then  asked  for  sugar  and 
tobacco.  I  told  him  I  had  none.  Another  Indian  began 
slowly  drifting  toward  me  in  spite  of  my  calling  out  to  keep 
back,  so  I  once  more  aimed  with  my  rifle,  whereupon  both 
Indians  slipped  to  the  other  side  of  their  horses  and  gal 
loped  off,  with  oaths  that  did  credit  to  at  least  one  side  of 
their  acquaintance  with  English.  I  now  mounted  and 
pushed  over  the  plateau  on  to  the  open  prairie.  In  those 
days  an  Indian,  although  not  as  good  a  shot  as  a  white  man, 
was  infinitely  better  at  crawling  under  and  taking  advantage 
of  cover ;  and  the  worst  thing  a  white  man  could  do  was  to 
get  into  cover,  whereas  out  in  the  open  if  he  kept  his  head 
he  had  a  good  chance  of  standing  off  even  half  a  dozen 
assailants.  The  Indians  accompanied  me  for  a  couple  of 
miles.  Then  I  reached  the  open  prairie,  and  resumed  my 
northward  ride,  not  being  further  molested. 

In  the  old  days  in  the  ranch  country  we  depended  upon 
game  for  fresh  meat.  Nobody  liked  to  kill  a  beef,  and  al 
though  now  and  then  a  maverick  yearling  might  be  killed 
on  the  round-up,  most  of  us  looked  askance  at  the  deed, 
because  if  the  practice  of  beef-killing  was  ever  allowed  to 
start,  the  rustlers — the  horse  thieves  and  cattle  thieves — 
would  be  sure  to  seize  on  it  as  an  excuse  for  general  slaugh- 


114    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ter.  Getting  meat  for  the  ranch  usually  devolved  upon  me. 
I  almost  always  carried  a  rifle  when  I  rode,  either  in  a  scab 
bard  under  my  thigh,  or  across  the  pommel.  Often  I  would 
pick  up  a  deer  or  antelope  while  about  my  regular  work, 
when  visiting  a  line  camp  or  riding  after  the  cattle.  At 
other  times  I  would  make  a  day's  trip  after  them.  In  the 
fall  we  sometimes  took  a  wagon  and  made  a  week's  hunt, 
returning  with  eight  or  ten  deer  carcasses,  and  perhaps  an 
elk  or  a  mountain  sheep  as  well.  I  never  became  more  than 
a  fair  hunter,  and  at  times  I  had  most  exasperating  experi 
ences,  either  failing  to  see  game  which  I  ought  to  have  seen, 
or  committing  some  blunder  in  the  stalk,  or  failing  to  kill 
when  I  fired.  Looking  back,  I  am  inclined  to  say  that  if  I 
had  any  good  quality  as  a  hunter  it  was  that  of  persever 
ance.  "It  is  dogged  that  does  it"  in  hunting  as  in  many 
other  things.  Unless  in  wholly  exceptional  cases,  when  we 
were  very  hungry,  I  never  killed  anything  but  bucks. 

Occasionally  I  made  long  trips  away  from  the  ranch  and 
among  the  Eocky  Mountains  with  my  ranch  foreman  Merri- 
field;  or  in  later  years  with  Tazewell  Woody,  John  Willis, 
or  John  Goff.  We  hunted  bears,  both  the  black  and  the 
grizzly,  cougars  and  wolves,  and  moose,  wapiti,  and  white 
goat.  On  one  of  these  trips  I  killed  a  bison  bull,  and  I  also 
killed  a  bison  bull  on  the  Little  Missouri  some  fifty  miles 
south  of  my  ranch  oil  a  trip  which  Joe  Ferris  and  I  took 
together.  It  was  rather  a  rough  trip.  Each  of  us  carried 
only  his  slicker  behind  him  on  the  saddle,  with  some  flour 
and  bacon  done  up  in  it.  We  met  with  all  kinds  of  misad 
ventures.  Finally  one  night,  when  we  were  sleeping  by  a 
slimy  little  prairie  pool  where  there  was  not  a  stick  of 
wood,  we  had  to  tie  the  horses  to  the  horns  of  our  saddles ; 
and  then  we  went  to  sleep  with  our  heads  on  the  saddles.  In 
the  middle  of  the  night  something  stampeded  the  horses, 
end  away  they  went,  with  the  saddles  after  them.  As  we 
jumped  to  our  feet  Joe  eyed  me  with  an  evident  suspicion 
that  I  was  the  Jonah  of  the  party,  and  said :  "0  Lord.  I've 
never  done  anything  to  deserve  this.  Did  you  ever  do  any 
thing  to  deserve  this?" 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  115 

In  addition  to  my  private  duties,  I  sometimes  served  as 
deputy  sheriff  for  the  northern  end  of  our  county.  The 
sheriff  and  I  crisscrossed  in  our  public  and  private  rela 
tions.  He  often  worked  for  me  as  a  hired  hand  at  the  same 
time  that  I  was  his  deputy.  His  name,  or  at  least  the  name 
he  went  by,  was  Bill  Jones,  and  as  there  were  in  the  neigh 
borhood  several  Bill  Joneses — Three  Seven  Bill  Jones, 
Texas  Bill  Jones,  and  the  like — the  sheriff  was  known  as 
Hell  Bearing  Bill  Jones.  He  was  a  thorough  frontiersman, 
excellent  in  all  kinds  of  emergencies,  and  a  very  game  man. 
I  became  much  attached  to  him.  He  was  a  thoroughly  good 
citizen  when  sober,  but  he  was  a  little  wild  when  drunk.  Un 
fortunately,  toward  the  end  of  his  life  he  got  to  drinking 
very  heavily.  When,  in  1905,  John  Burroughs  and  I  visited 
the  Yellowstone  Park,  poor  Bill  Jones,  very  much  down  in 
the  world,  was  driving  a  team  in  Gardiner  outside  the  park. 
I  had  looked  forward  to  seeing  him,  and  he  was  equally 
anxious  to  see  me.  He  kept  telling  his  cronies  of  our  in 
timacy  and  of  what  we  were  going  to  do  together,  and  then 
got  drinking ;  and  the  result  was  that  by  the  time  I  reached 
Gardiner  he  had  to  be  carried  out  and  left  in  the  sage-brush. 
When  I  came  out  of  the  park,  I  sent  on  in  advance  to  tell 
them  to  be  sure  to  keep  him  sober,  and  they  did  so.  But  it 
was  a  rather  sad  interview.  The  old  fellow  had  gone  to 
pieces,  and  soon  after  I  left  he  got  lost  in  a  blizzard  and  was 
dead  when  they  found  him. 

Bill  Jones  was  a  gun-fighter  and  also  a  good  man  with  his 
fists.  On  one  occasion  there  was  an  election  in  town.  There 
had  been  many  threats  that  the  party  of  disorder  would 
import  section  hands  from  the  neighboring  railway  stations 
to  down  our  side.  I  did  not  reach  Medora,  the  forlorn  little 
cattle  town  which  was  our  county  seat,  until  the  election 
was  well  under  way.  I  then  asked  one  of  my  friends  if  there 
had  been  any  disorder.  Bill  Jones  was  standing  by.  "Dis 
order  hell!"  said  my  friend.  "Bill  Jones  just  stood  there 
with  one  hand  on  his  gun  and  the  other  pointing  over  toward 
the  new  jail  whenever  any  man  who  didn't  have  a  right  to 
vote  came  near  the  polls.  There  was  only  one  of  them  tried 


116    THEODORE    BOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

to  vote,  and  Bill  knocked  him  down.  Lord!"  added  my 
friend,  meditatively,  "the  way  that  man  fell!"  "Well," 
struck  in  Bill  Jones,  "if  he  hadn't  fell  I'd  have  walked 
round  behind  him  to  see  what  was  propping  him  up!" 

In  the  days  when  I  lived  on  the  ranch  I  usually  spent  most 
of  the  winter  in  the  East,  and  when  I  returned  in  the  early 
spring  I  was  always  interested  in  finding  out  what  had  hap 
pened  since  my  departure.  On  one  occasion  I  was  met  by 
Bill  Jones  and  Sylvane  Ferris,  and  in  the  course  of  our  con 
versation  they  mentioned  "the  lunatic."  This  led  to  a 
question  on  my  part,  and  Sylvane  Ferris  began  the  story: 
"Well,  you  see,  he  was  on  a  train  and  he  shot  the  newsboy. 
At  first  they  weren't  going  to  do  anything  to  him,  for  they 
thought  he  just  had  it  in  for  the  newsboy.  But  then  some 
body  said,  'Why,  he's  plumb  crazy,  and  he's  liable  to  shoot 
any  of  us !'  and  then  they  threw  him  off  the  train.  It  was 
here  at  Medora,  and  they  asked  if  anybody  would  take  care 
of  him,  and  Bill  Jones  said  he  would,  because  he  was  the 
sheriff  and  the  jail  had  two  rooms,  and  he  was  living  in  one 
and  would  put  the  lunatic  in  the  other."  Here  Bill  Jones 
interrupted :  '  '  Yes,  a  more  fool  me !  I  wouldn  't  take  charge 
of  another  lunatic  if  the  whole  county  asked  me.  Why" 
(with  the  air  of  a  man  announcing  an  astounding  discov 
ery),  "that  lunatic  didn't  have  his  right  senses!  He 
wouldn't  eat,  till  me  and  Snyder  got  him  down  on  the  shav 
ings  and  made  him  eat."  Snyder  was  a  huge,  happy-go- 
lucky,  kind-hearted  Pennsylvania  Dutchman,  and  was  Bill 
Jones's  chief  deputy.  Bill  continued:  "You  know,  Sny 
der 's  soft-hearted,  he  is.  Well,  he'd  think  that  lunatic 
looked  peaked,  and  he  'd  take  him  out  for  an  airing.  Then 
the  boys  would  get  joshing  him  as  to  how  much  start  he 
could  give  him  over  the  prairie  and  catch  him  again."  Ap 
parently  the  amount  of  the  start  given  the  lunatic  depended 
upon  the  amount  of  the  bet  to  which  the  joshing  led  up. 
I  asked  Bill  what  he  would  have  done  if  Snyder  hadn't 
caught  the  lunatic.  This  was  evidently  a  new  idea,  and  he 
responded  that  Snyder  always  did  catch  him.  "Well,  but 
suppose  he  hadn't  caught  him!"  "Well,"  said  Bill  Jones, 


IN    COWBOY   LAND  117 

"if  Snyder  hadn't  caught  the  lunatic,  I'd  have  whaled  hell 
out  of  Snyder!" 

Under  these  circumstances  Snyder  ran  his  best  and  al 
ways  did  catch  the  patient.  It  must  not  be  gathered  from 
this  that  the  lunatic  was  badly  treated.  He  was  well  treated. 
He  became  greatly  attached  to  both  Bill  Jones  and  Snyder, 
and  he  objected  strongly  when,  after  the  frontier  theory  of 
treatment  of  the  insane  had  received  a  full  trial,  he  was 
finally  sent  off  to  the  territorial  capital.  It  was  merely  that 
all  the  relations  of  life  in  that  place  and  day  were  so  man 
aged  as  to  give  ample  opportunity  for  the  expression  of  in 
dividuality,  whether  in  sheriff  or  ranchman.  The  local 
practical  joker  once  attempted  to  have  some  fun  at  the  ex 
pense  of  the  lunatic,  and  Bill  Jones  described  the  result. 
"You  know  Bixby,  don't  you?  Well,"  with  deep  disap 
proval,  "Bixby  thinks  he  is  funny,  he  does.  He'd  come  and 
he'd  wake  that  lunatic  up  at  night,  and  I'd  have  to  get  up 
and  soothe  him.  I  fixed  Bixby  all  right,  though.  I  fastened 
a  rope  on  the  latch,  and  the  next  time  Bixby  came  I  let  the 
lunatic  out  on  him.  He's  most  bit  Bixby 's  nose  off.  I 
learned  Bixby!" 

Bill  Jones  had  been  unconventional  in  other  relations  be 
sides  that  of  sheriff.  He  once  casually  mentioned  to  me 
that  he  had  served  on  the  police  force  of  Bismarck,  but  he 
had  left  because  he  "beat  the  Mayor  over  the  head  with  his 
gun  one  day. ' '  He  added :  '  '  The  Mayor,  he  didn  't  mind  it, 
but  the  Superintendent  of  Police  said  he  guessed  I'd  better 
resign."  His  feeling,  obviously,  was  that  the  Superintend 
ent  of  Police  was  a  martinet,  unfit  to  take  large  views  of  life. 

It  was  while  with  Bill  Jones  that  I  first  made  acquaintance 
with  Seth  Bullock.  Seth  was  at  that  time  sheriff  in  the 
Black  Hills  district,  and  a  man  he  had  wanted — a  horse 
thief — I  finally  got,  I  being  at  the  time  deputy  sheriff  two 
or  three  hundred  miles  to  the  north.  The  man  went  by  a 
nickname  which  I  will  call  "Crazy  Steve";  a  year  or  two 
afterwards  I  received  a  letter  asking  about  him  from  his 
uncle,  a  thoroughly  respectable  man  in  a  Western  State; 
and  later  this  uncle  and  I  met  at  Washington  when  I  was 


118    THEODOEE   ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

President  and  he  a  United  States  Senator.  It  was  some 
time  after  "  Steve  V  capture  that  I  went  down  to  Dead- 
wood  on  business,  Sylvane  Ferris  and  I  on  horseback,  while 
Bill  Jones  drove  the  wagon.  At  a  little  town,  Spearfish, 
I  think,  after  crossing  the  last  eighty  or  ninety  miles  of 
gnmbo  prairies,  we  met  Seth  Bullock.  We  had  had  rather 
a  rough  trip,  and  had  lain  out  for  a  fortnight,  so  I  suppose 
we  looked  somewhat  unkempt.  Seth  received  us  with  rather 
distant  courtesy  at  first,  but  unbent  when  he  found  out  who 
we  were,  remarking,  "You  see,  by  your  looks  I  thought  you 
were  some  kind  of  a  tin-horn  gambling  outfit,  and  that  I 
might  have  to  keep  an  eye  on  you ! ' '  He  then  inquired  after 
the  capture  of  "  Steve " — with  a  little  of  the  air  of  one 
sportsman  when  another  has  shot  a  quail  that  either  might 
have  claimed — "My  bird,  I  believe?"  Later  Seth  Bullock 
became,  and  has  ever  since  remained,  one  of  my  stanchest 
and  most  valued  friends.  He  served  as  Marshal  for  South 
Dakota  under  me  as  President.  When,  after  the  close  of 
my  term,  I  went  to  Africa,  on  getting  back  to  Europe  I 
cabled  Seth  Bullock  to  bring  over  Mrs.  Bullock  and  meet  me 
in  London,  which  he  did ;  by  that  time  I  felt  that  I  just  had 
to  meet  my  own  people,  who  spoke  my  neighborhood  dialect. 
When  serving  as  deputy  sheriff  I  was  impressed  with  the 
advantage  the  officer  of  the  law  has  over  ordinary  wrong 
doers,  provided  he  thoroughly  knows  his  own  mind.  There 
are  exceptional  outlaws,  men  with  a  price  on  their  heads 
and  of  remarkable  prowess,  who  are  utterly  indifferent  to 
taking  life,  and  whose  warfare  against  society  is  as  open  as 
that  of  a  savage  on  the  war-path.  The  law  officer  has  no  ad 
vantage  whatever  over  these  men  save  what  his  own  prowess 
may — or  may  not — give  him.  Such  a  man  was  Billy  the 
Kid,  the  notorious  man-killer  and  desperado  of  New  Mexi 
co,  who  was  himself  finally  slain  by  a  friend  of  mine,  Pat 
Ofarrett,  whom,  when  I  was  President,  I  made  collector  of 
customs  at  El  Paso.  But  the  ordinary  criminal,  even  when 
murderously  inclined,  feels  just  a  moment's  hesitation  as 
to  whether  he  cares  to  kill  an  officer  of  the  law  engaged  in 
his  duty.  I  took  in  more  than  one  man  who  was  probably 


IN   COWBOY  LAND  119 

a  better  man  than  I  was  with  both  rifle  and  revolver ;  bnt 
in  each  case  I  knew  just  what  I  wanted  to  do,  and,  like 
David  Hamm,  I  "did  it  first,"  whereas  the  fraction  of  a 
second  that  the  other  man  hesitated  put  him  in  a  position 
where  it  was  useless  for  him  to  resist. 

I  owe  more  than  I  can  ever  express  to  the  "West,  which  of 
course  means  to  the  men  and  women  I  met  in  the  West. 
There  were  a  few  people  of  bad  type  in  my  neighborhood — 
that  would  be  true  of  every  group  of  men,  even  in  a  theo 
logical  seminary — but  I  could  not  speak  with  too  great  affec 
tion  and  respect  of  the  great  majority  of  my  friends,  the 
hard  working  men  and  women  who  dwelt  for  a  space  of  per 
haps  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  along  the  Little  Missouri.  I 
was  always  as  welcome  at  their  houses  as  they  were  at  mine. 
Everybody  worked,  everybody  was  willing  to  help  every 
body  else,  and  yet  nobody  asked  any  favors.  The  same 
thing  was  true  of  the  people  whom  I  got  to  know  fifty  miles 
east  and  fifty  miles  west  of  my  own  range,  and  of  the  men 
I  met  on  the  round-ups.  They  soon  accepted  me  as  a  friend 
and  fellow-worker  who  stood  on  an  equal  footing  with 
them,  and  I  believe  the  most  of  them  have  kept  their  feeling 
for  me  ever  since.  No  guests  were  ever  more  welcome  at 
the  White  House  than  these  old  friends  of  the  cattle  ranches 
and  the  cow  camps — the  men  with  whom  I  had  ridden  the 
long  circle  and  eaten  at  the  tail-board  of  a  chuck-wagon — 
whenever  they  turned  up  at  Washington  during  my  Presi 
dency.  I  remember  one  of  them  who  appeared  at  Washing 
ton  one  day  just  before  lunch,  a  huge,  powerful  man  who, 
when  I  knew  him,  had  been  distinctly  a  fighting  character* 
It  happened«that  on  that  day  another  old  friend,  the  British 
Ambassador,  Mr.  Bryce,  was  among  those  coming  to  lunch. 
Just  before  we  went  in  I  turned  to  my  cow-puncher  friend 
and  said  to  him  with  great  solemnity,  "Remember,  Jim, 
that  if  you  shot  at  the  feet  of  the  British  Ambassador  to 
make  him  dance,  it  would  be  likely  to  cause  international 
complications";  to  which  Jim  responded  with  unaffected 
horror,  "Why,  Colonel,  I  shouldn't  think  of  it,  I  shouldn't 
think  of  it  1" 


120    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Not  only  did  the  men  and  women  whom  I  met  in  the 
cow  country  quite  unconsciously  help  me,  by  the  insight 
which  working  and  living  with  them  enabled  me  to  get  into 
the  mind  and  soul  of  the  average  American  of  the  right 
type,  but  they  helped  me  in  another  way.  I  made  up  my 
mind  that  the  men  were  of  just  the  kind  whom  it  would  be 
well  to  have  with  me  if  ever  it  became  necessary  to  go  to 
war.  When  the  Spanish  War  came,  I  gave  this  thought 
practical  realization. 

Fortunately,  Wister  and  Remington,  with  pen  and  pencil, 
have  made  these  men  live  as  long  as  our  literature  lives.  I 
have  sometimes  been  asked  if  Wister 's  "Virginian"  is  not 
overdrawn;  why,  one  of  the  men  I  have  mentioned  in  this 
chapter  was  in  all  essentials  the  Virginian  in  real  life,  not 
only  in  his  force  but  in  his  charm.  Half  of  the  men  I 
worked  with  or  played  with  and  half  of  the  men  who 
soldiered  with  me  afterwards  in  my  regiment  might  have 
walked  out  of  Wister 's  stories  or  Kemington's  pictures. 

There  were  bad  characters  in  the  Western  country  at  that 
time,  of  course,  and  under  the  conditions  of  life  they  were 
probably  more  dangerous  than  they  would  have  been  else 
where.  I  hardly  ever  had  any  difficulty,  however.  I  never 
went  into  a  saloon,  and  in  the  little  hotels  I  kept  out  of  the 
bar-room  unless,  as  sometimes  happened,  the  bar-room  was 
the  only  room  on  the  lower  floor  except  the  dining-room.  I 
always  endeavored  to  keep  out  of  a  quarrel  until  self-re 
spect  forbade  my  making  any  further  effort  to  avoid  it,  and 
I  very  rarely  had  even  the  semblance  of  trouble. 

Of  course  amusing  incidents  occurred  now  and  then. 
Usually  these  took  place  when  I  was  hunting  lost  horses, 
for  in  hunting  lost  horses  I  was  ordinarily  alone,  and  oc 
casionally  had  to  travel  a  hundred  or  a  hundred  and  fifty 
miles  away  from  my  own  country.  On  one  such  occasion  I 
reached  a  little  cow  town  long  after  dark,  stabled  my  horse 
in  an  empty  outbuilding,  and  when  I  reached  the  hotel  was 
informed  in  response  to  my  request  for  a  bed  that  I  could 
have  the  last  one  left,  as  there  was  only  one  other  man  in  it. 
The  room  to  which  I  was  shown  contained  two  double  beds ; 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  121 

one  contained  two  men  fast  asleep,  and  the  other  only  one 
man,  also  asleep.  This  man  proved  to  be  a  friend,  one  of 
the  Bill  Joneses  whom  I  have  previously  mentioned.  I 
undressed  according  to  the  fashion  of  the  day  and  place, 
that  is,  I  put  my  trousers,  boots,  shaps,  and  gun  down  beside 
the  bed  and  turned  in.  A  couple  of  hours  later  I  was 
awakened  by  the  door  being  thrown  open  and  a  lantern 
flashed  in  my  face,  the  light  gleaming  on  the  muzzle  of  a 
cocked  .45.  Another  man  said  to  the  lantern-bearer.  "Ik 
ain't  him";  the  next  moment  my  bedfellow  was  covered 
with  two  guns,  and  addressed,  "Now,  Bill,  don't  make  a 
fuss,  but  come  along  quiet. "  "  I  'm  not  thinking  of  making  a 
fuss,"  said  Bijl.  "That's  right,"  was  the  answer;  "we're 
your  friends;  we  don't  want  to  hurt  you;  we  just  want  you 
to  come  along,  you  know  why."  And  Bill  pulled  on  his 
trousers  and  boots  and  walked  out  with  them.  Up  to  this 
time  there  had  not  been  a  sound  from  the  other  bed.  Now 
a  match  was  scratched,  a  candle  lit,  and  one  of  the  men  in 
the  other  bed  looked  round  the  room.  At  this  point  I  com 
mitted  the  breach  of  etiquette  of  asking  questions.  "I  won 
der  why  they  took  Bill,"  I  said.  There  was  no  answer,  and 
I  repeated,  "I  wonder  why  they  took  Bill."  "Well,"  said 
the  man  with  the  candle,  dryly,  "I  reckon  they  wanted  him," 
and  with  that  he  blew  out  the  candle  and  conversation 
ceased.  Later  I  discovered  that  Bill  in  a  fit  of  playfulness 
had  held  up  the  Northern  Pacific  train  at  a  near-by  station 
by  shooting  at  the  feet  of  the  conductor  to  make  him  dance. 
This  was  purely  a  joke  on  Bill's  part,  but  the  Northern 
Pacific  people  possessed  a  less  robust  sense  of  humor,  and 
on  their  complaint  the  United  States  Marshal  was  sent  after 
Bill,  on  the  ground  that  by  delaying  the  train  he  had  inter 
fered  with  the  mails. 

The  only  time  I  ever  had  serious  trouble  was  at  an  even 
more  primitive  little  hotel  than  the  one  in  question.  It  was 
also  on  an  occasion  when  I  was  out  after  lost  horses.  Below 
the  hotel  had  merely  a  bar-room,  a  dining-room,  and  a  lean- 
to  kitchen ;  above  was  a  loft  with  fifteen  or  twenty  beds  in 
it  It  was  late  in  the  evening  when  I  reached  the  place.  I 


122    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

heard  one  or  two  shots  in  the  bar-room  as  I  came  up,  and  I 
disliked  going  in.  But  there  was  nowhere  else  to  go,  and  it 
was  a  cold  night.  Inside  the  room  were  several  men,  who, 
including  the  bartender,  were  wearing  the  kind  of  smile 
worn  by  men  who  are  making  believe  to  like  what  they  don't 
like.  A  shabby  individual  in  a  broad  hat  with  a  cocked  gun 
in  each  hand  was  walking  up  and  down  the  floor  talking  with 
strident  profanity.  He  had  evidently  been  shooting  at  the 
clock,  which  had  two  or  three  holes  in  its  face. 

He  was  not  a  "bad  man"  of  the  really  dangerous  type, 
the  true  man-killer  type,  but  he  was  an  objectionable  crea 
ture,  a  would-be  bad  man,  a  bully  who  for  the  moment  was 
having  things  all  his  own  way.  As  soon  as  he  saw  me  he 
hailed  me  as  "Four  eyes,"  in  reference  to  my  spectacles, 
and  said,  "Four  eyes  is  going  to  treat."  I  joined  in  the 
laugh  and  got  behind  the  stove  and  sat  down,  thinking  to 
escape  notice.  He  followed  me,  however,  and  though  I 
tried  to  pass  it  off  as  a  jest  this  merely  made  him  more 
offensive,  and  he  stood  leaning  over  me,  a  gun  in  each  hand, 
using  very  foul  language.  He  was  foolish  to  stand  so  near, 
and,  moreover,  his  heels  were  close  together,  £o  that  his 
position  was  unstable.  Accordingly,  in  response  to  his  re 
iterated  command  that  I  should  set  up  the  drinks,  I  said, 
"Well,  if  I've  got  to,  IVe  got  to,"  and  rose,  looking  past 
him. 

As  I  rose,  I  struck  quick  and  hard  with  my  right  just  to 
one  side  of  the  point  of  his  jaw,  hitting  with  my  left  as  I 
straightened  out,  and  then  again  with  my  right.  He  fired 
the  guns,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  this  was  merely  a  con 
vulsive  action  of  his  hands  or  whether  he  was  trying  to 
shoot  at  me.  When  he  went  down  he  struck  the  corner  of 
the  bar  with  his  head.  It  was  not  a  case  in  which  one  could 
afford  to  take  chances,  and  if  he  had  moved  I  was  about  to 
drop  on  his  ribs  with  my  knees;  but  he  was  senseless.  I 
took  away  his  guns,  and  the  other  people  in  the  room,  who 
were  now  loud  in  their  denunciation  of  him,  hustled  him  out 
and  put  him  in  a  shed.  I  got  dinner  as  soon  as  possible, 
sitting  in  a  corner  of  the  dining-room  away  from  the  win- 


IN   COWBOY  LAND  123 

dows,  and  then  went  npstairs  to  bed  where  it  was  dark  so 
that  there  would  be  no  chance  of  any  one  shooting  at  me 
from  the  ontside.  However,  nothing  happened.  When  my 
assailant  came  to,  he  went  down  to  the  station  and  left  on  a 
freight. 

As  I  have  said,  most  of  the  men  of  my  regiment  were  just 
such  men  as  those  I  knew  in  the  ranch  country;  indeed, 
some  of  my  ranch  friends  were  in  the  regiment — Fred 
Herrig,  the  forest  ranger,  for  instance,  in  whose  company  I 
shot  my  biggest  mountain  ram.  After  the  regiment  was 
disbanded  the  careers  of  certain  of  the  men  were  diversified 
by  odd  incidents.  Our  relations  were  of  the  friendliest, 
and,  as  they  explained,  they  felt  " as  if  I  was  a  father"  to 
them.  The  manifestations  of  this  feeling  were  sometimes 
less  attractive  than  the  phrase  sounded,  as  it  was  chiefly 
used  by  the  few  who  were  behaving  like  very  bad  children 
indeed.  The  great  majority  of  the  men  when  the  regiment 
disbanded  took  up  the  business  of  their  lives  where  they  had 
dropped  it  a  few  months  previously,  and  these  men  merely 
tried  to  help  me  or  help  one  another  as  the  occasion  arose ; 
no  man  ever  had  more  cause  to  be  proud  of  his  regiment 
than  I  had  of  mine,  both  in  war  and  in  peace.  But  there 
was  a  minority  among  them  who  in  certain  ways  were  un- 
suited  for  a  life  of  peaceful  regularity,  although  often 
enough  they  had  been  first-class  soldiers. 

It  was  from  these  men  that  letters  came  with  a  stereo 
typed  opening  which  always  caused  my  heart  to  sink — 
"Dear  Colonel:  I  write  you  because  I  am  in  trouble."  The 
trouble  might  take  almost  any  form.  One  correspondent 
continued:  "I  did  not  take  the  horse,  but  they  say  I  did." 
Another  complained  that  his  mother-in-law  had  put  him  in 
jail  for  bigamy.  In  the  case  of  another  the  incident  was 
more  markworthy.  I  will  call  him  Gritto.  He  wrote  me  a 
letter  beginning :  "Dear  Colonel :  I  write  you  because  I  am 
in  trouble.  I  have  shot  a  lady  in  the  eye.  But,  Colonel, 
I  was  not  shooting  at  the  lady.  I  was  shooting  at  my  wife, ' 9 
which  he  apparently  regarded  as  a  sufficient  excuse  as  be 
tween  men  of  the  world.  I  answered  that  I  drew  the  line  at 


124    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

v 

shooting  at  ladies,  and  did  not  hear  any  more  of  the  in 
cident  for  several  years. 

Then,  while  I  was  President,  a  member  of  the  regiment, 
Major  Llewellyn,  who  was  Federal  District  Attorney  under 
me  in  New  Mexico,  wrote  me  a  letter  filled,  as  his  letters 
usually  were,  with  bits  of  interesting  gossip  about  the  com 
rades.  It  ran  in  part  as  follows:  " Since  I  last  wrote  you 
Comrade  Eitchie  has  killed  a  man  in  Colorado.  I  under 
stand  that  the  comrade  was  playing  a  poker  game,  and  the 
man  sat  into  the  game  and  used  such  language  that  Com 
rade  Eitchie  had  to  shoot.  Comrade  Webb  has  killed  two 
men  in  Beaver,  Arizona.  Comrade  Webb  is  in  the  Forest 
Service,  and  the  killing  was  in  the  line  of  professional  duty. 
I  was  out  at  the  penitentiary  the  other  day  and  saw  Com 
rade  Gritto,  who,  you  may  remember,  was  put  there  for 
shooting  his  sister-in-law  [this  was  the  first  information  I 
had  had  as  to  the  identity  of  the  lady  who  was  shot  in  the 
eye].  Since  he  was  in  there  Comrade  Boyne  has  run  off  to 
old  Mexico  with  his  ( Gritto  5s)  wife,  and  the  people  of  Grant 
County  think  he  ought  to  be  let  out."  Evidently  the  sport 
ing  instincts  of  the  people  of  Grant  County  had  been  roused, 
and  they  felt  that,  as  Comrade  Boyne  had  had  a  fair  start, 
the  other  comrade  should  be  let  out  in  order  to  see  what 
would  happen. 

The  men  of  the  regiment  always  enthusiastically  helped 
me  when  I  was  running  for  office.  On  one  occasion  Buck 
Taylor,  of  Texas,  accompanied  me  on  a  trip  and  made  a 
speech  for  me.  The  crowd  took  to  his  speech  from  the  be 
ginning  and  so  did  I,  until  the  peroration,  which  ran  as  fol 
lows:  "My  fellow-citizens,  vote  for  my  Colonel!  vote  for 
my  Colonel !  and  he  will  lead  you,  as  he  led  us,  like  sheep  to 
the  slaughter!"  This  hardly  seemed  a  tribute  to  my  mili 
tary  skill ;  but  it  delighted  the  crowd,  and  as  far  as  I  could 
tell  did  me  nothing  but  good. 

On  another  tour,  when  I  was  running  for  Vice-President, 
a  member  of  the  regiment  who  was  along  on  the  train  got 
into  a  discussion  with  a  Populist  editor  who  had  expressed 
an  unfavorable  estimate  of  my  character,  and  in  the  course 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  125 

of  the  discussion  shot  the  editor — not  fatally.  We  had  to 
leave  him  to  be  tried,  and  as  he  had  no  money  I  left  him 
$150  to  hire  counsel — having  borrowed  the  money  from 
Senator  Wolcott,  of  Colorado,  who  was  also  with  me.  After 
election  I  received  from  my  friend  a  letter  running :  ' '  Dear 
Colonel :  I  find  I  will  not  have  to  use  that  $150  you  lent  me, 
as  we  have  elected  our  candidate  for  District  Attorney.  So 
I  have  used  it  to  settle  a  horse  transaction  in  which  I  un 
fortunately  became  involved. ' '  A  few  weeks  later,  however, 
I  received  a  heartbroken  letter  setting  forth  the  fact  that 
the  District  Attorney — whom  he  evidently  felt  to  be  a  cold 
blooded  formalist — had  put  him  in  jail.  Then  the  affair 
dropped  out  of  sight  until  two  or  three  years  later,  when  as 
President  I  visited  a  town  in  another  State,  and  the  leaders 
of  the  delegation  which  received  me  included  both  my  cor 
respondent  and  the  editor,  now  fast  friends,  and  both  of 
them  ardent  supporters  of  mine. 

At  one  of  the  regimental  reunions  a  man,  who  had  been  an 
excellent  soldier,  in  greeting  me  mentioned  how  glad  he  was 
that  the  judge  had  let  him  out  in  time  to  get  to  the  reunion. 
I  asked  what  was  the  matter,  and  he  replied  with  some  sur 
prise:  "Why,  Colonel,  don't  you  know  I  had  a  difficulty 
with  a  gentleman,  and  ...  er  ...  well,  I  killed  the  gen 
tleman.  But  you  can  see  that  the  judge  thought  it  was  all 
right  or  he  wouldn't  have  let  me  go."  Waiving  the  latter 
point,  I  said:  "How  did  it  happen?  How  did  you  do  it?" 
Misinterpreting  my  question  as  showing  an  interest  only  in 
the  technique  of  the  performance,  the  ex-puncher  replied: 
"With  a  .38  on  a  .45  frame,  Colonel."  I  chuckled  over  the 
answer,  and  it  became  proverbial  with  my  family  and  some 
of  my  friends,  including  Seth  Bullock.  When  I  was  shot  at 
Milwaukee,  Seth  Bullock  wired  an  inquiry  to  which  I  re- 
spended  that  it  was  all  right,  that  the  weapon  was  merely 
"a  .38  on  a  .45  frame."  The  telegram  in  some  way  became 
public,  and  puzzled  outsiders.  By  the  way,  both  the  men 
of  my  regiment  and  the  friends  I  had  made  in  the  old  days 
in  the  West  were  themselves  a  little  puzzled  at  the  interest 
shown  in  my  making  my  speech  after  being  shot.  This  was 


126    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

what  they  expected,  what  they  accepted  as  the  right  thing 
for  a  man  to  do  under  the  circumstances,  a  thing  the  non- 
performance  of  which  would  have  been  discreditable  rather 
than  the  performance  being  creditable.  They  would  not 
have  expected  a  man  to  leave  a  battle,  for  instance,  because 
of  being  wounded  in  such  fashion ;  and  they  saw  no  reason 
why  he  should  abandon  a  less  important  and  less  risky 
duty. 

One  of  the  best  soldiers  of  my  regiment  was  a  huge  man 
whom  I  made  marshal  of  a  Eocky  Mountain  State.  He  had 
spent  his  hot  and  lusty  youth  on  the  frontier  during  its 
viking  age,  and  at  that  time  had  naturally  taken  part  in  in 
cidents  which  seemed  queer  to  men  "accustomed  to  die 
decently  of  zymotic  diseases.''  I  told  him  that  an  effort 
would  doubtless  be  made  to  prevent  his  confirmation  by  the 
Senate,  and  therefore  that  I  wanted  to  know  all  the  facts  in 
his  case.  Had  he  played  faro  I  He  had;  but  it  was  when 
everybody  played  faro,  and  he  had  never  played  a  brace 
game.  Had  he  killed  anybody?  Yes,  but  it  was  in  Dodge 
City  on  occasions  when  he  was  deputy  marshal  or  town  mar 
shal,  at  a  time  when  Dodge  City,  now  the  most  peaceful  of 
communities,  was  the  toughest  town  on  the  continent,  and 
crowded  with  man-killing  outlaws  and  road  agents ;  and  he 
produced  telegrams  from  judges  of  high  character  testify 
ing  to  the  need  of  the  actions  he  had  taken.  Finally  I  said : 
"Now,  Ben,  how  did  you  lose  that  half  of  your  ear?"  To 
which,  looking  rather  shy,  he  responded :  "Well,  Colonel,  it 
was  bit  off."  "How  did  it  happen,  Ben?"  "Well,  you 
see,  I  was  sent  to  arrest  a  gentleman,  and  him  and  me  mixed 
it  up,  and  he  bit  off  my  ear."  "What  did  you  do  to  the 
gentleman,  Ben?"  And  Ben,  looking  more  coy  than  ever, 
responded :  '  *  Well,  Colonel,  we  broke  about  even ! "  I  fore- 
bore  to  inquire  what  variety  of  mayhem  he  had  committed 
on  the  "gentleman."  After  considerable  struggle  I  got 
him  confirmed  by  the  Senate,  and  he  made  one  of  the  best 
marshals  in  the  entire  service,  exactly  as  he  had  already 
made  one  of  the  best  soldiers  in  the  regiment ;  and  I  never 


IN   COWBOY   LAND  127 

wish  to  see  a  better  citizen,  nor  a  man  in  whom  I  would 
more  implicitly  trust  in  every  way. 

When,  in  1900, 1  was  nominated  for  Vice-President,  I  was 
sent  by  the  National  Committee  on  a  trip  into  the  States  of 
the  high  plains  and  the  Eocky  Mountains.  These  had  all 
gone  overwhelmingly  for  Mr.  Bryan  on  the  free-silver  issue 
four  years  previously,  and  it  was  thought  that  I,  because  of 
my  knowledge  of  and  acquaintanceship  with  the  people, 
might  accomplish  something  towards  bringing  them  back 
into  line.  It  was  an  interesting  trip,  and  the  monotony 
usually  attendant  upon  such  la  campaign  of  political  speak 
ing  was  diversified  in  vivid  fashion  by  occasional  hostile 
audiences.  One  or  two  of  the  meetings  ended  in  riots.  One 
meeting  was  finally  broken  up  by  a  mob ;  everybody  fought 
so  that  the  speaking  had  to  stop.  Soon  after  this  we  reached 
another  town  where  we  were  told  there  might  be  trouble. 
Here  the  local  committee  included  an  old  and  valued  friend, 
a  " two-gun"  man  of  repute,  who  was  not  in  the  least  quar 
relsome,  but  who  always  kept  his  word.  We  marched  round 
to  the  local  opera-house,  which  was  packed  with  a  mass  of 
men,  many  of  them  rather  rough-looking.  My  friend  the 
two-gun  man  sat  immediately  behind  me,  a  gun  on  each  hip, 
his  arms  folded,  looking  at  the  audience ;  fixing  his  gaze  with 
instant  intentness  on  any  section  of  the  house  from  which 
there  came  so  much  as  a  whisper.  The  audience  listened  to 
me  with  rapt  attention.  At  the  end,  with  a  pride  in  my 
rhetorical  powers  which  proceeded  from  a  misunderstand 
ing  of  the  situation,  I  remarked  to  the  chairman:  "I  held 
that  audience  well;  there  wasn't  an  interruption."  To 
which  the  chairman  replied :  * '  Interruption  I  Well,  I  guess 
not !  Seth  had  sent  round  word  that  if  any  son  of  a  gun 
peeped  he  M  kill  him ! ' 9 

There  was  one  bit  of  frontier  philosophy  which  I  should 
like  to  see  imitated  in  more  advanced  communities.  Cer 
tain  crimes  of  revolting  baseness  and  cruelty  were  never  for 
given.  But  in  the  case  of  ordinary  offenses,  the  man  who 
had  served  his  term  and  who  then  tried  to  make  good  was 


128    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

given  a  fair  chance ;  and  of  course  this  was  equally  true  of 
the  women.  Every  one  who  has  studied  the  subject  at  all 
is  only  too  well  aware  that  the  world  offsets  the  readiness 
with  which  it  condones  a  crime  for  which  a  man  escapes 
punishment,  by  its  unforgiving  relentlessness  to  the  often 
far  less  guilty  man  who  is  punished,  and  who  therefore  has 
made  his  atonement.  On  the  frontier,  if  the  man  honestly 
tried  to  behave  himself  there  was  generally  a  disposition 
to  give  him  fair  play  and  a  decent  show.  Several  of  the 
men  I  knew  and  whom  I  particularly  liked  came  in  this 
class.  There  was  one  such  man  in  my  regiment,  a  man  who 
had  served  a  term  for  robbery  under  arms,  and  who  had 
atoned  for  it  by  many  years  of  fine  performance  of  duty. 
I  put  him  in  a  high  official  position,  and  no  man  under  me 
rendered  better  service  to  the  State,  nor  was  there  any  man 
whom,  as  soldier,  as  civil  officer,  as  citizen,  and  as  friend,  I 
valued  and  respected — and  now  value  and  respect — more. 

Now  I  suppose  some  good  people  will  gather  from  this 
that  I  favor  men  who  commit  crimes.  I  certainly  do  not 
favor  them.  I  have  not  a  particle  of  sympathy  with  the 
sentimentality — as  I  deem  it,  the  mawkishness — which 
overflows  with  foolish  pity  for  the  criminal  and  cares  not 
at  all  for  the  victim  of  the  criminal.  I  am  glad  to  see  wrong 
doers  punished.  The  punishment  is  an  absolute  necessity 
from  the  standpoint  of  society ;  and  I  put  the  reformation 
of  the  criminal  second  to  the  welfare  of  society.  But  I  do 
desire  to  see  the  man  or  woman  who  has  paid  the  penalty 
and  who  wishes  to  reform  given  a  helping  hand — surely 
every  one  of  us  who  knows  his  own  heart  must  know  that  he 
too  may  stumble,  and  should  be  anxious  to  help  his  brother 
or  sister  who  has  stumbled.  When  the  criminal  has  been 
punished,  if  he  then  shows  a  sincere  desire  to  lead  a  decent 
and  upright  life,  he  should  be  given  the  chance,  he  should 
be  helped  and  not  hindered ;  and  if  he  makes  good,  he  should 
receive  that  respect  from  others  which  so  often  aids  in 
creating  self-respect- -the  most  invaluable  of  all  posses 
sions,  v 


CHAPTER  V 

APPLIED   IDEALISM 

IN  the  spring  of  1889  I  was  appointed  by  President  Harri 
son  Civil  Service  Commissioner.  For  nearly  five  years  I 
had  not  been  very  active  in  political  life;  although  I  had 
done  some  routine  work  in  the  organization  and  had  made 
campaign  speeches,  and  in  1886  had  run  for  Mayor  of  New 
York  against  Abram  S.  Hewitt,  Democrat,  and  Henry 
George,  Independent,  and  had  been  defeated. 

I  served  six  years  as  Civil  Service  Commissioner — four 
years  under  President  Harrison  and  then  two  years  under 
President  Cleveland.  I  was  treated  by  both  Presidents 
with  the  utmost  consideration.  Among  my  fellow-Commis 
sioners  there  was  at  one  time  ex-Governor  Hugh  Thomp 
son,  of  South  Carolina,  and  at  another  time  John  R.  Proc 
tor,  of  Kentucky.  They  were  Democrats  and  ex-Confeder 
ate  soldiers.  I  became  deeply  attached  to  both,  and  we 
stood  shoulder  to  shoulder  in  every  contest  in  which  the 
Commission  was  forced  to  take  part. 

Civil  Service  Reform  had  two  sides.  There  was,  first, 
the  effort  to  secure  a  more  efficient  administration  of  the 
public  service,  and,  second,  the  even  more  important  effort 
to  withdraw  the  administrative  offices  of  the  Government 
from  the  domain  of  spoils  politics,  and  thereby  cut  out  of 
American  political  life  a  fruitful  source  of  corruption  and 
degradation.  The  spoils  theory  of  politics  is  that  public 
office  is  so  much  plunder  which  the  victorious  political  party 
is  entitled  to  appropriate  to  the  use  of  its  adherents.  Under 
this  system  the  work  of  the  Government  was  often  done  well 
even  in  those  days,  when  Civil  Service  Reform  was  only  an 
experiment,  because  the  man  running  an  office  if  himself 
an  able  and  far-sighted  man,  knew  that  inefficiency  in  ad- 

129 


130    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ministration  would  be  visited  on  his  head  in  the  long  run, 
and  therefore  insisted  upon  most  of  his  subordinates  doing 
good  work;  and,  moreover,  the  men  appointed  under  the 
spoils  system  were  necessarily  men  of  a  certain  initiative 
and  power,  because  those  who  lacked  these  qualities  were 
not  able  to  shoulder  themselves  to  the  front.  Yet  there 
were  many  flagrant  instances  of  inefficiency,  where  a  power 
ful  chief  quartered  friend,  adherent,  or  kinsman  upon  the 
Government.  Moreover,  the  necessarily  haphazard  nature 
of  the  employment,  the  need  of  obtaining  and  holding  the 
office  by  service  wholly  unconnected  with  official  duty,  in 
evitably  tended  to  lower  the  standard  of  public  morality, 
alike  among  the  office-holders  and  among  the  politicians 
who  rendered  party  service  with  the  hope  of  reward  in 
office.  Indeed,  the  doctrine  that  "To  the  victor  belong  the 
spoils,"  the  cynical  battle-cry  of  the  spoils  politician  in 
America  for  the  sixty  years  preceding  my  own  entrance  into 
public  life,  is  so  nakedly  vicious  that  few  right-thinking  men 
of  trained  mind  defend  it.  To  appoint,  promote,  reduce, 
and  expel  from  the  public  service,  letter-carriers,  stenogra 
phers,  women  typewriters,  clerks,  because  of  the  politics  of 
themselves  or  their  friends,  without  regard  to  their  own 
service,  is,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  people  at  large,  as 
foolish  and  degrading  as  it  is  wicked. 

Such  being  the  case,  it  would  seem  at  first  sight  extraor 
dinary  that  it  should  be  so  difficult  to  uproot  the  system. 
Unfortunately,  it  was  permitted  to  become  habitual  and 
traditional  in  American  life,  so  that  the  conception  of  public 
office  as  something  to  be  used  primarily  for  the  good  of  the 
dominant  political  party  became  ingrained  in  the  mind  of 
the  average  American,  and  he  grew  so  accustomed  to  the 
whole  process  that  it  seemed  part  of  the  order  of  nature. 
Not  merely  the  politicians  but  the  bulk  of  the  people  ac 
cepted  this  in  a  matter-of-course  way  as  the  only  proper  at 
titude.  There  were  plenty  of  communities  where  the  citi 
zens  themselves  did  not  think  it  natural,  or  indeed  proper, 
that  the  Post-Office  should  be  held  by  a  man  belonging  to 
the  defeated  party.  Moreover,  unless  both  sides  were  for- 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  131 

bidden  to  use  the  offices  for  purposes  of  political  reward,  the 
side  that  did  use  them  possessed  such  an  advantage  over 
the  other  that  in  the  long  run  it  was  out  of  the  question  for 
the  other  not  to  follow  the  bad  example  that  had  been  set. 
Each  party  profited  by  the  offices  when  in  power,  and  when 
in  opposition  each  party  insincerely  denounced  its  oppo 
nents  for  doing  exactly  what  it  itself  had  done  and  in 
tended  again  to  do. 

It  was  necessary,  in  order  to  remedy  the  evil,  both  grad 
ually  to  change  the  average  citizen's  mental  attitude  toward 
the  question,  and  also  to  secure  proper  laws  and  proper  ad 
ministration  of  the  laws.  The  work  is  far  from  finished 
even  yet.  There  are  still  masses  of  office-holders  who  can 
be  used  by  an  unscrupulous  Administration  to  debauch 
political  conventions  and  fraudulently  overcome  public 
sentiment,  especially  in  the  "rotten  borough "  districts — 
those  where  the  party  is  not  strong,  and  where  the  office 
holders  in  consequence  have  a  disproportionate  influence. 
This  was  done  by  the  Eepublican  Administration  in  1912, 
to  the  ruin  of  the  Eepublican  party.  Moreover,  there  are 
numbers  of  States  and  municipalities  where  very  little  has 
as  yet  been  done  to  do  away  with  the  spoils  system.  But 
in  the  National  Government  scores  of  thousands  of  offices 
have  been  put  under  the  merit  system,  chiefly  through  the 
action  of  the  National  Civil  Service  Commission. 

The  use  of  Government  offices  as  patronage  is  a  handicap 
difficult  to  overestimate  from  the  standpoint  of  those  who 
strive  to  get  good  government.  Any  effort  for  reform  of 
any  sort,  National,  State,  or  municipal,  results  in  the  re 
formers  immediately  finding  themselves  face  to  face  with 
an  organized  band  of  drilled  mercenaries  who  are  paid  out 
of  the  public  chest  to  train  themselves  with  such  skill  that 
ordinary  good  citizens  when  they  meet  them  at  the  polls 
are  in  much  the  position  of  militia  matched  against  regular 
troops.  Yet  these  citizens  themselves  support  and  pay  their 
opponents  in  such  a  way  that  they  are  drilled  to  overthrow 
the  very  men  who  support  them.  Civil  Service  Eeform  is 
designed  primarily  to  give  the  average  American  citizen 


132    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

a  fair  chance  in  politics  to  give  to  this  citizen  the  same 
weight  in  politics  that  the  "ward  heeler"  has. 

Patronage  does  not  really  help  a  party.  It  helps  the 
bosses  to  get  control  of  the  machinery  of  the  party — as  in 
1912  was  true  of  the  Eepublican  party — but  it  does  not 
help  the  party.  On  the  average,  the  most  sweeping  party 
victories  in  our  history  have  been  won  when  the  patronage 
was  against  the  victors.  All  that  the  patronage  does  is  to 
help  the  worst  element  in  the  party  retain  control  of  the 
party  organization.  Two  of  the  evil  elements  in  our  Gov 
ernment  against  which  good  citizens  have  to  contend  are, 
1,  the  lack  of  continuous  activity  on  the  part  of  these  good 
citizens  themselves,  and,  2,  the  ever-present  activity  of 
those  who  have  only  an  evil  self-interest  in  political  life. 
It  is  difficult  to  interest  the  average  citizen  in  any  particular 
movement  to  the  degree  of  getting  him  to  take  an  efficient 
part  in  it.  He  wishes  the  movement  well,  but  he  will  not, 
or  often  cannot,  take  the  time  and  the  trouble  to  serve  it 
efficiently;  and  this  whether  he  happens  to  be  a  mechanic 
or  a  banker,  a  telegraph  operator  or  a  storekeeper.  He 
has  his  own  interests,  his  own  business,  and  it  is  difficult 
for  him  to  spare  the  time  to  go  around  to  the  primaries,  to 
see  to  the  organization,  to  see  to  getting  out  the  vote — in 
short,  to  attend  to  all  the  thousand  details  of  political  man 
agement. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  spoils  system  breeds  a  class  of 
men  whose  financial  interest  it  is  to  take  this  necessary  time 
and  trouble.  They  are  paid  for  so  doing,  and  they  are  paid 
out  of  the  public  chest.  Under  the  spoils  system  a  man  is 
appointed  to  an  ordinary  clerical  or  ministerial  position  in 
the  municipal,  Federal,  or  State  government,  not  primarily 
because  he  is  expected  to  be  a  good  servant,  but  because  he 
has  rendered  help  to  some  big  boss  or  to  the  henchman  of 
some  big  boss.  His  stay  in  office  depends  not  upon  how  he 
performs  service,  but  upon  how  he  retains  his  influence  in 
the  party.  This  necessarily  means  that  his  attention  to  the 
interests  of  the  public  at  large,  even  though  real,  is  second 
ary  to  his  devotion  to  his  organization,  or  to  the  interest  of 


APPLIED   IDEALISM  133 

the  ward  leader  who  put  him  in  his  place.  So  he  and  his 
fellows  attend  to  politics,  not  once  a  year,  not  two  or  three 
times  a  year,  like  the  average  citizen,  but  every  day  in  the 
year.  It  is  the  one  thing  that  they  talk  of,  for  it  is  their 
bread  and  butter.  They  plan  about  it  and  they  scheme  about 
it.  They  do  it  because  it  is  their  business.  I  do  not  blame 
them  in  the  least.  I  blame  us,  the  people,  for  we  ought  to 
make  it  clear  as  a  bell  that  the  business  of  serving  the  people 
in  one  of  the  ordinary  ministerial  Government  positions, 
which  have  nothing  to  do  with  deciding  the  policy  of  the 
Government,  should  have  no  necessary  connection  with  the 
management  of  primaries,  of  caucuses,  and  of  nominating 
conventions.  As  a  result  of  our  wrong  thinking  and  supine- 
ness,  we  American  citizens  tend  to  breed  a  mass  of  men 
whose  interests  in  governmental  matters  are  often  adverse 
to  ours,  who  are  thoroughly  drilled,  thoroughly  organized, 
who  make  their  livelihood  out  of  politics,  and  who  fre 
quently  make  their  livelihood  out  of  bad  politics.  They 
know  every  little  twist  and  turn,  no  matter  how  intricate,  in 
the  politics  of  their  several  wards,  and  when  election  day 
comes  the  ordinary  citizen  who  has  merely  the  interest  that 
all  good  men,  all  decent  citizens,  should  have  in  political 
life,  finds  himself  as  helpless  before  these  men  as  if  he  were 
a  solitary  volunteer  in  the  presence  of  a  band  of  drilled 
mercenaries  on  a  field  of  battle.  There  are  a  couple  of 
hundred  thousand  Federal  offices,  not  to  speak  of  State  and 
municipal  offices.  The  men  who  fill  these  offices,  and  the 
men  who  wish  to  fill  them,  within  and  without  the  dominant 
party  for  the  time  being,  make  a  regular  army,  whose  inter 
est  it  is  that  the  system  of  bread-and-butter  politics  shall 
continue.  Against  their  concrete  interest  we  have  merely 
the  generally  unorganized  sentiment  of  the  community  in 
favor  of  putting  things  on  a  decent  basis.  The  large  num 
ber  of  men  who  believe  vaguely  in  good  are  pitted  against 
the  smaller  but  still  larger  number  of  men  whose  interest  it 
often  becomes  to  act  very  concretely  and  actively  for  evil ; 
and  it  is  small  wonder  that  the  struggle  is  doubtful. 
During  my  six  years'  service  as  Commissioner  the  field 


134    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

of  the  merit  system  was  extended  at  the  expense  of  the 
spoils  system  so  as  to  include  several  times  the  number  of 
offices  that  had  originally  been  included.  Generally  this 
was  done  by  the  introduction  of  competitive  entrance  exam 
inations  ;  sometimes,  as  in  the  Navy- Yards,  by  a  system  of 
registration.  This  of  itself  was  good  work. 

Even  better  work  was  making  the  law  efficient  and  gen 
uine  where  it  applied.  As  was  inevitable  in  the  introduction 
of  such  a  system,  there  was  at  first  only  partial  success  in 
its  application.  For  instance,  it  applied  to  the  ordinary  em 
ployees  in  the  big  custom-houses  and  post-offices,  but  not 
to  the  heads  of  these  offices.  A  number  of  the  heads  of  the 
offices  were  slippery  politicians  of  a  low  moral  grade,  them 
selves  appointed  under  the  spoils  system,  and  anxious,  di 
rectly  or  indirectly,  to  break  down  the  merit  system  and 
to  pay  their  own  political  debts  by  appointing  their  hench 
men  and  supporters  to  the  positions  under  them.  Occa 
sionally  these  men  acted  with  open  and  naked  brutality. 
Ordinarily  they  sought  by  cunning  to  evade  the  law.  The 
Civil  Service  Eeformers,  on  the  other  hand,  were  in  most 
cases  not  much  used  to  practical  politics,  and  were  often 
well-nigh  helpless  when  pitted  against  veteran  professional 
politicians.  In  consequence  I  found  at  the  beginning  of  my 
experiences  that  there  were  many  offices  in  which  the  exe 
cution  of  the  law  was  a  sham.  This  was  very  damaging, 
because  it  encouraged  the  politicians  to  assault  the  law 
everywhere,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  made  good  people  feel 
that  the  law  was  not  worth  while  defending. 

The  first  effort  of  myself  and  my  colleagues  was  to  secure 
the  genuine  enforcement  of  the  law.  In  this  we  succeeded 
after  a  number  of  lively  fights.  But  of  course  in  these  fights 
we  were  obliged  to  strike  a  large  number  of  influential 
politicians,  some  of  them  in  Congress,  some  of  them  the 
supporters  and  backers  of  men  who  were  in  Congress.  Ac 
cordingly  we  soon  found  ourselves  engaged  in  a  series  of 
contests  with  prominent  Senators  and  Congressmen.  There 
were  a  number  of  Senators  and  Congressmen — men  like 
Congressman  (afterwards  Senator)  H.  C.  Lodge,  of  Massa- 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  135 

chusetts ;  Senator  Cushman  K.  Davis,  of  Minnesota ;  Sena 
tor  Orville  H.  Platt,  of  Connecticut;  Senator  Cockrell,  of 
Missouri;  Congressman  (afterwards  President)  McKinley, 
of  Ohio,  and  Congressman  Dargan,  of  South  Carolina — who 
abhorred  the  business  of  the  spoilsman,  who  efficiently  and 
resolutely  championed  the  reform  at  every  turn,  and  with 
out  whom  the  whole  reform  would  certainly  have  failed. 
But  there  were  plenty  of  other  Senators  and  Congressmen 
who  hated  the  whole  reform  and  everything  concerned  with 
it  and  everybody  who  championed  it;  and  sometimes,  to 
use  a  legal  phrase,  their  hatred  was  for  cause,  and  some 
times  it  was  peremptory — that  is,  sometimes  the  Commis 
sion  interfered  with  their  most  efficient,  and  incidentally 
most  corrupt  and  unscrupulous,  supporters,  and  at  other 
times,  where  there  was  no  such  interference,  a  man  never 
theless  had  an  innate  dislike  of  anything  that  tended  to 
decency  in  government.  These  men  were  always  waging 
war  against  us,  and  they  usually  had  the  more  or  less  open 
support  of  a  certain  number  of  Government  officials,  from 
Cabinet  officers  down.  The  Senators  and  Congressmen  in 
question  opposed  us  in  many  different  ways.  Sometimes, 
for  instance,  they  had  committees  appointed  to  investigate 
us — during  my  public  career  without  and  within  office  I 
grew  accustomed  to  accept  appearances  before  investigat 
ing  committees  as  part  of  the  natural  order  of  things.  Some 
times  they  tried  to  cut  off  the  appropriation  for  the  Com 
mission. 

Occasionally  we  would  bring  to  terms  these  Senators  or 
Congressmen  who  fought  the  Commission  by  the  simple 
expedient  of  not  holding  examinations  in  their  districts. 
This  always  brought  frantic  appeals  from  their  constituents, 
and  we  would  explain  that  unfortunately  the  appropriations 
had  been  cut,  so  that  we  could  not  hold  examinations  in 
every  district,  and  that  obviously  we  could  not  neglect  the 
districts  of  those  Congressmen  who  believed  in  the  reform 
and  therefore  in  the  examinations.  The  constituents  then 
turned  their  attention  to  the  Congressman,  and  the  result 
was  that  in  the  long  run  we  obtained  sufficient  money  to 


136    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

enable  us  to  do  our  work.  On  the  whole,  the  most  prom 
inent  leaders  favored  us.  Any  man  who  is  the  head  of  a 
big  department,  if  he  has  any  fitness  at  all,  wishes  to  see 
that  department  run  well;  and  a  very  little  practical  ex 
perience  shows  him  that  it  cannot  be  run  well  if  he  must 
make  his  appointments  to  please  spoilsmongering  politi 
cians.  As  with  almost  every  reform  that  I  have  ever  under 
taken,  most  of  the  opposition  took  the  guise  of  shrewd 
slander.  Our  opponents  relied  chiefly  on  downright  misrep 
resentation  of  what  it  was  that  we  were  trying  to  accom 
plish,  and  of  our  methods,  acts,  and  personalities.  I  had 
more  than  one  lively  encounter  with  the  authors  and 
sponsors  of  these  misrepresentations,  which  at  the  time 
were  full  of  interest  to  me.  But  it  w^ould  be  a  dreary  thing 
now  to  go  over  the  record  of  exploded  mendacity,  or  to  ex 
pose  the  meanness  and  malice  shown  by  some  men  of  high 
official  position.  A  favorite  argument  was  to  call  the  re 
form  Chinese,  because  the  Chinese  had  constructed  an  in 
efficient  governmental  system  based  in  part  on  the  theory 
of  written  competitive  examinations.  The  argument  was 
simple.  There  had  been  written  examinations  in  China ;  it 
was  proposed  to  establish  written  examinations  in  the 
United  States ;  therefore  the  proposed  system  was  Chinese. 
The  argument  might  have  been  applied  still  further.  For 
instance,  the  Chinese  had  used  gunpowder  for  centuries; 
gunpowder  is  used  in  Springfield  rifles;  therefore  Spring 
field  rifles  were  Chinese.  One  argument  is  quite  as  logical 
as  the  other.  It  was  impossible  to  answer  every  falsehood 
about  the  system.  But  it  was  possible  to  answer  certain 
falsehoods,  especially  when  uttered  by  some  Senator  or 
Congressman  of  note.  Usually  these  false  statements  took 
the  form  of  assertions  that  we  had  asked  preposterous 
questions  of  applicants.  At  times  they  also  included  the 
assertion  that  we  credited  people  to  districts  where  they  did 
not  live ;  this  simply  meaning  that  these  persons  were  not 
known  to  be  active  ward  politicians  of  those  districts. 

One  opponent  with  whom  we  had  a  rather  lively  tilt  was 
a  Eepublican  Congressman  from  Ohio,  Mr.  Grosvenor,  one 


APPLIED   IDEALISM  137 

of  the  floor  leaders.  Mr.  Grosvenor  made  his  attack  in  the 
House,  and  enumerated  our  sins  in  picturesque  rather 
than  accurate  fashion.  There  was  a  Congressional  com 
mittee  investigating  us  at  the  time,  and  on  my  next  appear 
ance  before  them  I  asked  that  Mr.  Grosvenor  be  requested 
to  meet  me  before  the  committee.  Mr.  Grosvenor  did  not 
take  up  the  challenge  for  several  weeks,  until  it  was  an 
nounced  that  I  was  leaving  for  my  ranch  in  Dakota ;  where 
upon,  deeming  it  safe,  he  wrote  me  a  letter  expressing  his 
ardent  wish  that  I  should  appear  before  the  committee  to 
meet  him.  I  promptly  canceled  my  ticket,  waited,  and  met 
him.  He  proved  to  be  a  person  of  happily  treacherous  mem 
ory,  so  that  the  simple  expedient  of  arranging  his  state 
ments  in  pairs  was  sufficient  to  reduce  him  to  confusion. 
For  instance,  he  had  been  trapped  into  making  the  un 
wary  remark,  "I  do  not  want  to  repeal  the  Civil  Service 
Law,  and  I  never  said  so."  I  produced  the  following  ex 
tract  from  one  of  his  speeches:  "I  will  vote  not  only  to 
strike  out  this  provision,  but  I  will  vote  to  repeal  the  whole 
law."  To  this  he  merely  replied  that  there  was  "no  incon 
sistency  between  those  two  statements."  He  asserted  that 
"Rufus  P.  Putnam,  fraudulently  credited  to  Washington 
County,  Ohio,  never  lived  in  Washington  County,  Ohio,  or 
in  my  Congressional  district,  or  in  Ohio  as  far  as  I  know." 
We  produced  a  letter  which,  thanks  to  a  beneficent  Provi 
dence,  he  had  himself  written  about  Mr.  Rufus  P.  Putnam, 
in  which  he  said:  "Mr.  Eufus  P.  Putnam  is  a  legal  resident 
of  my  district  and  has  relatives  living  there  now."  He  ex 
plained,  first,  that  he  had  not  written  the  letter;  second, 
that  he  had  forgotten  he  had  written  the  letter ;  and,  third, 
that  he  was  grossly  deceived  when  he  wrote  it.  He  said: 
"I  have  not  been  informed  of  one  applicant  who  has  found 
a  place  in  the  classified  service  from  my  district."  We  con 
fronted  him  with  the  names  of  eight.  He  looked  them  over 
and  said,  "Yes,  the  eight  men  are  living  in  my  district  as 
now  constituted,"  but  added  that  his  district  had  been 
gerrymandered  so  that  he  could  no  longer  tell  who  did  and 
who  didn't  live  in  it.  When  I  started  further  to  question 


138    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

him,  lie  accused  me  of  a  lack  of  humor  in  not  appreciating 
that  his  statements  were  made  "in  a  jesting  way,"  and 
then  announced  that  "a  Congressman  making  a  speech  on 
the  floor  of  the  House  of  Kepresentatives  was  perhaps  in  a 
little  different  position  from  a  witness  on  the  witness 
stand" — a  frank  admission  that  he  did  not  consider  exacti 
tude  of  statement  necessary  when  he  was  speaking  as  a 
Congressman.  Finally  he  rose  with  great  dignity  and  said 
that  it  was  his  " constitutional  right"  not  to  be  questioned 
elsewhere  as  to  what  he  said  on  the  floor  of  the  House  of 
Eepresentatives ;  and  accordingly  he  left  the  delighted  com 
mittee  to  pursue  its  investigations  without  further  aid  from 
him. 

A  more  important  opponent  was  the  then  Democratic 
leader  of  the  Senate,  Mr.  Gorman.  In  a  speech  attacking 
the  Commission  Mr.  Gorman  described  with  moving  pathos 
how  a  friend  of  his,  "a  bright  young  man  from  Baltimore," 
a  Sunday-school  scholar,  well  recommended  by  his  pastor, 
wished  to  be  a  letter-carrier;  and  how  he  went  before  us 
to  be  examined.  The  first  question  we  asked  him,  said  Mr. 
Gorman,  was  the  shortest  route  from  Baltimore  to  China, 
to  which  the  " bright  young  man"  responded  that  he  didn't 
want  to  go  to  China,  and  had  never  studied  up  that  route. 
Thereupon,  said  Mr.  Gorman,  we  asked  him  all  about  the 
steamship  lines  from  the  United  States  to  Europe,  then 
branched  him  off  into  geology,  tried  him  in  chemistry,  and 
finally  turned  him  down. 

Apparently  Mr.  Gorman  did  not  know  that  we  kept  full 
records  of  our  examinations.  I  at  once  wrote  to  him  stating 
that  I  had  carefully  looked  through  all  our  examination 
papers  iand  had  not  been  able  to  find  one  question  even  re 
motely  resembling  any  of  these  questions  which  he  alleged 
had  been  asked,  and  that  I  would  be  greatly  obliged  if  he 
would  give  me  the  name  of  the  "bright  young  man"  who 
had  deceived  him. 

However,  that  "bright  young  man"  remained  perma 
nently  without  a  name.  I  also  asked  Mr.  Gorman,  if  he  did 
not  wish  to  give  us  the  name  of  his  informant,  to  give  us  the 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  139 

date  of  the  examination  in  which  he  was  supposed  to  have 
taken  part;  and  I  offered,  if  he  would  send  down  a  repre 
sentative  to  look  through  our  files,  to  give  him  all  the  aid 
we  could  in  his  effort  to  discover  any  such  questions.  But 
Mr.  Gorman,  not  hitherto  known  as  a  sensitive  soul,  ex 
pressed  himself  as  so  shocked  at  the  thought  that  the  ve 
racity  of  the  " bright  young  man"  should  be  doubted  that 
he  could  not  bring  himself  to  answer  my  letter.  So  I  made 
a  public  statement  to  the  effect  that  no  such  questions  had 
ever  been  asked.  Mr.  Gorman  brooded  over  this ;  and  dur 
ing  the  next  session  of  Congress  he  rose  and  complained 
that  he  had  received  a  very  "  impudent "  letter  from  me 
(my  letter  was  a  respectful  note  calling  attention  to  the  fact 
that,  if  he  wished,  he  could  by  personal  examination  satisfy 
himself  that  his  statements  had  no  foundation  in  fact).  He 
further  stated  that  he  had  been  "cruelly"  called  to  account 
by  me  because  he  had  been  endeavoring  to  right  a  "great 
wrong"  that  the  Civil  Service  Commission  had  committed; 
but  he  never,  then  or  afterwards,  furnished  any  clue  to  the 
identity  of  that  child  of  his  fondest  fancy,  the  bright  young 
man  without  a  name.1 

The  incident  is  of  note  chiefly  as  shedding  light  on  the 
mental  make-up  of  the  man  who  at  the  time  was  one  of  the 
two  or  three  most  influential  leaders  of  the  Democratic 
party.  Mr.  Gorman  had  been  Mr.  Cleveland's  party  mana 
ger  in  the  Presidential  campaign,  and  was  the  Democratic 
leader  in  Congress.  It  seemed  extraordinary  that  he  should 
be  so  reckless  as  to  make  statements  with  no  foundation  in 
fact,  which  he  might  have  known  that  I  would  not  permit  to 
pass  unchallenged.  Then,  as  now,  the  ordinary  newspaper, 
in  New  York  and  elsewhere,  was  quite  as  reckless  in  its  mis- 
statements  of  fact  about  public  men  and  measures ;  but  for  a 
man  in  Mr.  Gorman's  position  of  responsible  leadership 
such  action  seemed  hardly  worth  while.  However,  it  is  at 
least  to  be  said  for  Mr.  Gorman  that  he  was  not  trying  by 
falsehood  to  take  away  any  man's  character.  It  would  be 

1  This  is  a  condensation  of  a  speech  I  at  the  time  made  to  the  St.  Louis 
Civil  Service  Reform  Association.  Senator  Gorman  was  then  the  Senate 
leader  of  the  party  that  had  just  been  victorious  in  the  Congressional  election^ 


140    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

well  for  writers  and  speakers  to  bear  in  mind  the  remark  of 
Pudd'nhead  Wilson  to  the  effect  that  while  there  are  nine 
hundred  and  ninety-nine  kinds  of  falsehood,  the  only  kind 
specifically  condemned  in  Scripture,  just  as  murder,  theft, 
and  adultery  are  condemned,  is  bearing  false  witness 
against  one's  neighbor. 

One  of  the  worst  features  of  the  old  spoils  system  was  the 
ruthless  cruelty  and  brutality  it  so  often  bred  in  the  treat 
ment  of  faithful  public  servants  without  political  influence. 
Life  is  hard  enough  and  cruel  enough  at  best,  and  this  is  as 
true  of  public  service  as  of  private  service.  Under  no  sys 
tem  will  it  be  possible  to  do  away  with  all  favoritism  and 
brutality  and  meanness  and  malice.  But  at  least  we  can  try 
to  minimize  the  exhibition  of  these  qualities.  I  once  came 
across  a  case  in  Washington  which  very  keenly  excited  my 
sympathy.  Under  an  Administration  prior  to  the  one  with 
which  I  was  connected  a  lady  had  been  ousted  from  a  Gov 
ernment  position.  She  came  to  me  to  see  if  she  could  be 
reinstated.  (This  was  not  possible,  but  by  active  work  I 
did  get  her  put  back  in  a  somewhat  lower  position,  and  this 
only  by  an  appeal  to  the  sympathy  of  a  certain  official.) 
She  was  so  pallid  and  so  careworn  that  she  excited  my  sym 
pathy  and  I  made  inquiries  about  her.  She  was  a  poor 
woman  with  two  children,  a  widow.  She  and  her  two  chil 
dren  were  in  actual  want.  She  could  barely  keep  the  two 
children  decently  clad,  and  she  could  not  give  them  the  food 
growing  children  need.  Three  years  before  she  had  been 
employed  in  a  bureau  in  a  department  of  Washington,  do 
ing  her  work  faithfully,  at  a  salary  of  about  $800.  It  was 
enough  to  keep  her  and  her  two  children  in  clothing,  food, 
and  shelter.  One  day  the  chief  of  the  bureau  called  her  up 
and  told  her  he  was  very  sorry  that  he  had  to  dismiss  her. 
In  great  distress  she  asked  him  why ;  she  thought  that  she 
had  been  doing  her  work  satisfactorily.  He  answered  her 
that  she  had  been  doing  well,  and  that  he  wished  very  much 
that  he  could  keep  her,  that  he  would  do  so  if  he  possibly 
could,  but  that  he  could  not ;  for  a  certain  Senator,  giving 
his  name,  a  very  influential  member  of  the  Senate,  had  de~ 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  141 

manded  her  place  for  a  friend  of  his  who  had  influence. 
The  woman  told  the  bureau  chief  that  it  meant  turning  her 
out  to  starve.  She  had  been  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  in 
the  public  service;  she  had  lost  all  touch  with  her  friends 
in  her  native  State ;  dismissal  meant  absolute  want  for  her 
and  her  children.  On  this  the  chief,  who  was  a  kind  man, 
said  he  would  not  have  her  turned  out,  and  sent  her  back  to 
her  work. 

But  three  weeks  afterwards  he  called  her  up  again  and 
told  her  he  could  not  say  how  sorry  he  was,  but  the  thing 
had  to  be  done.  The  Senator  had  been  around  in  person  to 
know  why  the  change  had  not  been  made,  and  had  told  the 
chief  that  he  would  be  himself  removed  if  the  place  were  not 
given  him.  The  Senator  was  an  extremely  influential  man. 
His  wants  had  to  be  attended  to,  and  the  woman  had  to  go. 
And  go  she  did,  and  turned  out  she  was,  to  suffer  with  her 
children  and  to  starve  outright,  or  to  live  in  semi-starvation, 
just  as  might  befall.  I  do  not  blame  the  bureau  chief,  who 
hated  to  do  what  he  did,  although  he  lacked  the  courage  to 
refuse ;  I  do  not  even  very  much  blame  the  Senator,  who  did 
not  know  the  hardship  that  he  was  causing,  and  who  had 
been  calloused  by  long  training  in  the  spoils  system;  but 
this  system,  a  system  which  permits  and  encourages  such 
deeds,  is  a  system  of  brutal  iniquity. 

Any  man  accustomed  to  dealing  with  practical  politics 
can  with  difficulty  keep  a  straight  face  when  he  reads  or 
listens  to  some  of  the  arguments  advanced  against  Civil 
Service  Eeform.  One  of  these  arguments,  a  favorite  with 
machine  politicians,  takes  the  form  of  an  appeal  to  "party 
loyalty''  in  filling  minor  offices.  Why,  again  and  again 
these  very  same  machine  politicians  take  just  as  good  care 
of  henchmen  of  the  opposite  party  as  of  those  of  their  own 
party.  In  the  underworld  of  politics  the  closest  ties  are 
sometimes  those  which  knit  together  the  active  professional 
workers  of  opposite  political  parties.  A  friend  of  mine  in 
the  New  York  Legislature — the  hero  of  the  alpha  and 
omega  incident — once  remarked  to  me:  "When  you  have 
been  in  public  life  a  little  longer,  Mr.  Roosevelt,  you  will 


142    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

understand  that  there  are  no  politics  in  politics."  In  the 
politics  to  which  he  was  referring  this  remark  could  be 
taken  literally. 

Another  illustration  of  this  truth  was  incidentally  given 
me,  at  about  the  same  time,  by  an  acquaintance,  a  Tam 
many  man  named  Costigan,  a  good  fellow  according  to  his 
lights.  I  had  been  speaking  to  him  of  a  fight  in  one  of  the 
New  York  downtown  districts,  a  Democratic  district  in 
which  the  Eepublican  party  was  in  a  hopeless  minority,  and, 
moreover,  was  split  into  the  Half-Breed  and  Stalwart  fac 
tions.  It  had  been  an  interesting  fight  in  more  than  one 
way.  For  instance,  the  Eepublican  party,  at  the  general 
election,  polled  something  like  five  hundred  and  fifty  votes, 
and  yet  at  the  primary  the  two  factions  polled  seven  hun 
dred  and  twenty-five  all  told.  The  sum  of  the  parts  was 
thus  considerably  greater  than  the  whole.  There  had  been 
other  little  details  that  made  the  contest  worthy  of  note. 
The  hall  in  which  the  primary  was  held  had  been  hired  by 
the  Stalwarts  from  a  conscientious  gentleman.  To  him  the 
Half-Breeds  applied  to  know  whether  they  could  not  hire 
the  hall  away  from  their  opponents,  and  offered  him  a  sub 
stantial  money  advance.  The  conscientious  gentleman  re 
plied  that  his  word  was  as  good  as  his  bond,  that  he  had 
hired  the  hall  to  the  Stalwarts,  and  that  it  must  be  theirs. 
But  he  added  that  he  was  willing  to  hire  the  doorway  to  the 
Half-Breeds  if  they  paid  him  the  additional  sum  of  money 
they  had  mentioned.  The  bargain  was  struck,  and  the 
meeting  of  the  hostile  hosts  was  spirited,  when  the  men  who 
had  rented  the  doorway  sought  to  bar  the  path  of  the  men 
who  had  rented  the  hall.  I  was  asking  my  friend  Costigan 
about  the  details  of  the  struggle,  as  he  seemed  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  them,  and  he  smiled  good-naturedly  over 
my  surprise  at  there  having  been  more  votes  cast  than  there 
were  members  of  the  party  in  the  whole  district.  Said  I, 
"Mr.  Costigan,  you  seem  to  have  a  great  deal  of  knowledge 
about  this;  how  did  it  happen  1"  To  which  he  replied, 
"Come  now,  Mr.  Eoosevelt,  you  know  it's  the  same  gang 
that  votes  in  all  the  primaries." 


APPLIED   IDEALISM  143 

So  much  for  most  of  the  opposition  to  the  reform.  There 
was,  however,  some  honest  and  at  least  partially  justifiable 
opposition  both  to  certain  of  the  methods  advocated  by 
Civil  Service  Keformers  and  to  certain  of  the  Civil  Service 
Keformers  themselves.  The  pet  shibboleths  of  the  oppo 
nents  of  the  reform  were  that  the  system  we  proposed  to 
introduce  would  give  rise  to  mere  red-tape  bureaucracy, 
and  that  the  reformers  were  pharisees.  Neither  statement 
was  true.  Each  statement  contained  some  truth. 

If  men  are  not  to  be  appointed  by  favoritism,  wise  or  un 
wise,  honest  or  dishonest,  they  must  be  appointed  in  some 
automatic  way,  which  generally  means  by  competitive  ex 
amination.  The  easiest  kind  of  competitive  examination  is 
an  examination  in  writing.  This  is  entirely  appropriate 
for  certain  classes  of  work,  for  lawyers,  stenographers, 
typewriters,  clerks,  mathematicians,  and  assistants  in  an 
astronomical  observatory,  for  instance.  It  is  utterly  inap 
propriate  for  carpenters,  detectives,  and  mounted  cattle 
inspectors  along  the  Rio  Grande — to  instance  three  types 
of  employment  as  to  which  I  had  to  do  battle  to  prevent 
well-meaning  bureaucrats  from  insisting  on  written  com 
petitive  entrance  examinations.  It  would  be  quite  possible 
to  hold  a  very  good  competitive  examination  for  mounted 
cattle  inspectors  by  means  of  practical  tests  in  brand  read 
ing  and  shooting  with  rifle  and  revolver,  in  riding  "mean" 
horses  and  in  roping  and  throwing  steers.  I  did  my  best  to 
have  examinations  of  this  kind  instituted,  but  my  proposal 
was  of  precisely  the  type  which  most  shocks  the  routine 
official  mind,  and  I  was  never  able  to  get  it  put  into  prac 
tical  effect. 

The  important  point,  and  the  point  most  often  forgotten 
by  zealous  Civil  Service  Eeformers,  was  to  remember  that 
the  routine  competitive  examination  was  merely  a  means  to 
an  end.  It  did  not  always  produce  ideal  results.  But  it 
was  normally  better  than  a  system  of  appointments  for 
spoils  purposes ;  it  sometimes  worked  out  very  well  indeed ; 
and  in  most  big  governmental  offices  it  not  only  gave  satis 
factory  results,  but  was  the  only  system  under  which  good 


144    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

results  could  be  obtained.  For  instance,  when  I  was  Police 
Commissioner  we  appointed  some  two  thousand  policemen 
at  one  time.  It  was  utterly  impossible  for  the  Commis 
sioners  each  to  examine  personally  the  six  or  eight  thousand 
applicants.  Therefore -they  had  to  be  appointed  either  on 
the  recommendation  of  outsiders  or  else  by  written  com 
petitive  examination.  The  latter  method — the  one  we 
adopted — was  infinitely  preferable.  We  held  a  rigid  phys 
ical  and  moral  pass  examination,  and  then,  among  those 
who  passed,  we  held  a  written  competitive  examination,  re 
quiring  only  the  knowledge  that  any  good  primary  common 
school  education  would  meet — that  is,  a  test  of  ordinary 
intelligence  and  simple  mental  training.  Occasionally  a 
man  who  would  have  been  a  good  officer  failed,  and  occa 
sionally  a  man  who  turned  out  to  be  a  bad  officer  passed; 
but,  as  a  rule,  the  men  with  intelligence  sufficient  to  enable 
them  to  answer  the  questions  were  of  a  type  very  distinctly 
above  that  of  those  who  failed. 

The  answers  returned  to  some  of  the  questions  gave  an 
illuminating  idea  of  the  intelligence  of  those  answering 
them.  For  instance,  one  of  our  questions  in  a  given  exami 
nation  was  a  request  to  name  five  of  the  New  England 
States.  One  competitor,  obviously  of  foreign  birth,  an 
swered:  "England,  Ireland,  Scotland,  Whales,  and  Cork." 
His  neighbor,  who  had  probably  looked  over  his  shoulder 
but  who  had  North  of  Ireland  prejudices,  made  the  same 
answer  except  that  he  substituted  Belfast  for  Cork.  A  re 
quest  for  a  statement  as  to  the  life  of  Abraham  Lincoln 
elicited,  among  other  less  startling  pieces  of  information, 
the  fact  that  many  of  the  applicants  thought  that  he  was  a 
general  in  the  Civil  War ;  several  thought  that  he  was  Presi 
dent  of  the  Confederate  States ;  three  thought  he  had  been 
assassinated  by  Jefferson  Davis,  one  by  Thomas  Jefferson, 
one  by  Garfield,  several  by  Guiteau,  and  one  by  Ballington 
Booth — the  last  representing  a  memory  of  the  fact  that  he 
had  been  shot  by  a  man  named  Booth,  to  whose  surname 
the  writer  added  the  name  with  which  he  was  most  familiar 
in  connection  therewith.  A  request  to  name  five  of  the 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  145 

States  that  seceded  in  1861  received  answers  that  included 
almost  every  State  in  the  Union.  It  happened  to  be  at  the 
time  of  the  silver  agitation  in  the  West,  and  the  Eocky 
Mountain  States  accordingly  figured  in  a  large  percentage 
of  the  answers.  Some  of  the  men  thought  that  Chicago 
was  on  the  Pacific  Ocean.  Others,  in  answer  to  a  query  as 
to  who  was  the  head  of  the  United  States  Government, 
wavered  between  myself  and  Eecorder  Goff ;  one  brilliant 
genius,  for  inscrutable  reasons,  placed  the  leadership  in  the 
New  York  Fire  Department.  Now  of  course  some  of  the 
men  who  answered  these  questions  wrong  were  nevertheless 
quite  capable  of  making  good  policemen;  but  it  is  fair  to 
assume  that  on  the  average  the  candidate  who  has  a  rudi 
mentary  knowledge  of  the  government,  geography,  and 
history  of  his  country  is  a  little  better  fitted,  in  point  of 
intelligence,  to  be  a  policeman  than  the  one  who  has  not. 

Therefore  I  felt  convinced,  after  full  experience,  that  as 
regards  very  large  classes  of  public  servants  by  far  the  best 
way  to  choose  the  men  for  appointment  was  by  means  of 
written  competitive  examination.  But  I  absolutely  split 
off  from  the  bulk  of  my  professional  Civil  Service  Reform 
friends  when  they  advocated  written  competitive  examina 
tions  for  promotion.  In  the  Police  Department  I  found 
these  examinations  a  serious  handicap  in  the  way  of  getting 
the  best  men  promoted,  and  never  in  any  office  did  I  find 
that  the  written  competitive  promotion  examination  did 
any  good.  The  reason  for  a  written  competitive  entrance 
examination  is  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  head  of  the  office, 
or  the  candidate's  prospective  immediate  superior,  himself 
to  know  the  average  candidate  or  to  test  his  ability.  But 
when  once  in  office  the  best  way  to  test  any  man's  ability 
is  by  long  experience  in  seeing  him  actually  at  work.  His 
promotion  should  depend  upon  the  judgment  formed  of  him 
by  his  superiors. 

So  much  for  the  objections  to  tne  examinations.  Now 
for  the  objections  to  the  men  who  advocated  the  reform. 
As  a  rule  these  men  were  high-minded  and  disinterested. 
Certain  of  them,  men  like  the  leaders  in  the  Maryland 


146    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

and  Indiana  Reform  Associations,  for  instances,  Messrs. 
Bonaparte  and  Rose,  Foulke  and  Swift,  added  common 
sense,  broad  sympathy,  and  practical  efficiency  to  their 
high-mindedness.  But  in  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and 
Boston  there  really  was  a  certain  mental  and  moral  thin 
ness  among  very  many  of  the  leaders  in  the  Civil  Service 
Reform  movement.  It  was  this  quality  which  made  them 
so  profoundly  antipathetic  to  vigorous  and  intensely  human 
people  of  the  stamp  of  my  friend  Joe  Murray — who,  as  I 
have  said,  always  felt  that  my  Civil  Service  Reform  affilia 
tions  formed  the  one  blot  on  an  otherwise  excellent  public 
record.  The  Civil  Service  Reform  movement  was  one  from 
above  downwards,  and  the  men  who  took  the  lead  in  it 
were  not  men  who  as  a  rule  possessed  a  very  profound  sym 
pathy  with  or  understanding  of  the  ways  of  thought  and 
life  of  their  average  fellow-citizen.  They  were  not  men  who 
themselves  desired  to  be  letter-carriers  or  clerks  or  police 
men,  or  to  have  their  friends  appointed  to  these  positions. 
Having  no  temptation  themselves  in  this  direction,  they 
were  eagerly  anxious  to  prevent  other  people  getting  such 
appointments  as  a  reward  for  political  services.  In  this  they 
were  quite  right.  It  would  be  impossible  to  run  any  big 
public  office  to  advantage  save  along  the  lines  of  the  strict 
est  application  of  Civil  Service  Reform  principles ;  and  the 
system  should  be  extended  throughout  our  governmental 
service  far  more  widely  than  is  now  the  case. 

But  there  are  other  and  more  vital  reforms  than  this. 
Too  many  Civil  Service  Reformers,  when  the  trial  came, 
proved  tepidly  indifferent  or  actively  hostile  to  reforms 
that  were  of  profound  and  far-reaching  social  and  indus 
trial  consequence.  Many  of  them  were  at  best  lukewarm 
about  movements  for  the  improvement  of  the  conditions  of 
toil  and  life  among  men  and  women  who  labor  under  hard 
surroundings,  and  were  positively  hostile  to  movements 
which  curbed  the  power  of  the  great  corporation  magnates 
and  directed  into  useful  instead  of  pernicious  channels  the 
activities  of  the  great  corporation  lawyers  who  advised 
them. 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  147 

Most  of  the  newspapers  which  regarded  themselves  as 
the  especial  champions  of  Civil  Service  Eeform  and  as  the 
highest  exponents  of  civic  virtue,  and  which  distrusted  the 
average  citizen  and  shuddered  over  the  "coarseness"  of 
the  professional  politicians,  were,  nevertheless,  given  to 
vices  even  more  contemptible  than,  although  not  so  gross 
as,  those  they  denounced  and  derided.  Their  editors  were 
refined  men  of  cultivated  tastes,  whose  pet  temptations 
were  backbiting,  mean  slander,  and  the  snobbish  worship  of 
anything  clothed  in  wealth  and  the  outward  appearances 
of  conventional  respectability.  They  were  not  robust  or 
powerful  men ;  they  felt  ill  at  ease  in  the  company  of  rough, 
strong  men;  often  they  had  in  them  a  vein  of  physical 
timidity.  They  avenged  themselves  to  themselves  for  an 
uneasy  subconsciousness  of  their  own  shortcomings  by  sit 
ting  in  cloistered — or,  rather,  pleasantly  upholstered — se 
clusion,  and  sneering  at  and  lying  about  men  who  made 
them  feel  uncomfortable.  Sometimes  these  were  bad  men, 
who  made  them  feel  uncomfortable  by  the  exhibition  of 
coarse  and  repellent  vice ;  and  sometimes  they  were  men  of 
high  character,  who  held  ideals  of  courage  and  of  service  to 
others,  and  who  looked  down  and  warred  against  the  short 
comings  of  swollen  wealth,  and  the  effortless,  easy  lives  of 
those  whose  horizen  is  bounded  by  a  sheltered  and  timid 
respectability.  These  newspapers,  owned  and  edited  by 
these  men,  although  free  from  the  repulsive  vulgarity  of  the 
yellow  press,  were  susceptible  to  influence  by  the  privileged 
interests,  and  were  almost  or  quite  as  hostile  to  manliness 
as  they  were  to  unrefined  vice — and  were  much  more  hostile 
to  it  than  to  the  typical  shortcomings  of  wealth  and  refine 
ment.  They  favored  Civil  Service  Reform;  they  favored 
copyright  laws,  and  the  removal  of  the  tariff  on  works  of 
art;  they  favored  all  the  proper  (and  even  more  strongly 
all  the  improper)  movements  for  international  peace  and 
arbitration;  in  short,  they  favored  all  good,  and  many 
goody-goody,  measures  so  long  as  they  did  not  cut  deep  into 
social  wrong  or  make  demands  on  National  and  individual 
virility.  They  opposed,  or  were  lukewarm  about,  efforts 


148    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

to  build  up  the  army  and  the  navy,  for  they  were  not  sensi 
tive  concerning  National  honor;  and,  above  all,  they  op 
posed  every  non-milk-and-water  effort,  however  sane,  to 
change  our  social  and  economic  system  in  such  a  fashion 
as  to  substitute  the  ideal  of  justice  towards  all  for  the  ideal 
of  kindly  charity  from  the  favored  few  to  the  possibly  grate 
ful  many. 

Some  of  the  men  foremost  in  the  struggle  for  Civil  Serv 
ice  Kef orm  have  taken  a  position  of  honorable  leadership  in 
the  battle  for  those  other  and  more  vital  reforms.  But 
many  of  them  promptly  abandoned  the  field  of  effort  for 
decency  when  the  battle  took  the  form,  not  of  a  fight  against 
the  petty  grafting  of  small  bosses  and  small  politicians — a 
vitally  necessary  battle,  be  it  remembered — but  of  a  fight 
against  the  great  intrenched  powers  of  privilege,  a  fight  to 
secure  justice  through  the  law  for  ordinary  men  and  women, 
instead  of  leaving  them  to  suffer  cruel  injustice  either  be 
cause  the  law  failed  to  protect  them  or  because  it  was 
twisted  from  its  legitimate  purposes  into  a  means  for  op 
pressing  them. 

One  of  the  reasons  why  the  boss  so  often  keeps  his  hold, 
especially  in  municipal  matters,  is,  or  at  least  has  been  in 
the  past,  because  so  many  of  the  men  who  claim  to  be  re 
formers  have  been  blind  to  the  need  of  working  in  human 
fashion  for  social  and  industrial  betterment.  Such  words 
as  "boss"  and  "machine"  now  imply  evil,  but  both  the  im 
plication  the  words  carry  and  the  definition  of  the  words 
themselves  are  somewhat  vague.  A  leader  is  necessary; 
but  his  opponents  always  call  him  a  boss.  An  organization 
is  necessary;  but  the  men  in  opposition  always  call  it  a 
machine.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  real  and  deep  distinction 
between  the  leader  and  the  boss,  between  organizations  and 
machines.  A  political  leader  who  fights  openly  for  princi 
ples,  and  who  keeps  his  position  of  leadership  by  stirring 
the  consciences  and  convincing  the  intellects  of  his  follow 
ers,  so  that  they  have  confidence  in  him  and  will  follow  him 
because  they  can  achieve  greater  results  under  him  than 
under  any  one  else,  is  doing  work  which  is  indispensable  in 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  149 

a  democracy.  The  boss,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  man  who 
does  not  gain  his  power  by  open  means,  but  by  secret  means, 
and  usually  by  corrupt  means.  Some  of  the  worst  and  most 
powerful  bosses  in  our  political  history  either  held  no  pub 
lic  office  or  else  some  unimportant  public  office.  They  made 
no  appeal  either  to  intellect  or  conscience.  Their  work  was 
done  behind  closed  doors,  and  consisted  chiefly  in  the  use  of 
that  greed  which  gives  in  order  that  in  return  it  may  get. 
A  boss  of  this  kind  can  pull  wires  in  conventions,  can  manip 
ulate  members  of  the  Legislature,  can  control  the  giving  or 
withholding  of  office,  and  serves  as  the  intermediary  for 
bringing  together  the  powers  of  corrupt  politics  and  cor 
rupt  business.  If  he  is  at  one  end  of  the  social  scale,  he  may 
through  his  agents  traffic  in  the  most  brutal  forms  of  vice 
and  give  protection  to  the  purveyors  of  shame  and  sin  in  re 
turn  for  money  bribes.  If  at  the  other  end  of  the  scale,  he 
may  be  the  means  of  securing  favors  from  high  public  offi 
cials,  legislative  or  executive,  to  great  industrial  interests; 
the  transaction  being  sometimes  a  naked  matter  of  bargain 
and  sale,  and  sometimes  being  carried  on  in  such  manner 
that  both  parties  thereto  can  more  or  less  successfully  dis 
guise  it  to  their  consciences  as  in  the  public  interest.  The 
machine  is  simply  another  name  for  the  kind  of  organiza 
tion  which  is  certain  to  grow  up  in  a  party  or  section  of  a 
party  controlled  by  such  bosses  as  these  and  by  their  hench 
men,  whereas,  of  course,  an  effective  organization  of  decent 
men  is  essential  in  order  to  secure  decent  politics. 

If  these  bosses  were  responsible  for  nothing  but  pure 
wickedness,  they  would  probably  last  but  a  short  time  in 
any  community.  And,  in  any  event,  if  the  men  who  are 
horrified  by  their  wickedness  were  themselves  as  practical 
and  as  thoroughly  in  touch  with  human  nature,  the  bosses 
would  have  a  short  shrift.  The  trouble  is  that  the  boss  does 
understand  human  nature,  and  that  he  fills  a  place  which 
the  reformer  cannot  fill  unless  he  likewise  understands 
human  nature.  Sometimes  the  boss  is  a  man  who  cares  for 
political  power  purely  for  its  own  sake,  as  he  might  care  for 
any  other  hobby;  more  often  he  has  in  view  some  definitely 


150    THEODORE    EOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

selfish  object  such  as  political  or  financial  advancement. 
He  can  rarely  accomplish  much  unless  he  has  another  side 
to  him.  A  successful  boss  is  very  apt  to  be  a  man  who,  in 
addition  to  committing  wickedness  in  his  own  interest,  also 
does  look  after  the  interests  of  others,  even  if  not  from  good 
motives.  There  are  some  communities  so  fortunate  that 
there  are  very  few  men  who  have  private  interests  to  be 
served,  and  in  these  the  power  of  the  boss  is  at  a  minimum. 
There  are  many  country  communities  of  this  type.  But  in 
communities  where  there  is  poverty  and  ignorance,  the  con 
ditions  are  ripe  for  the  growth  of  a  boss.  Moreover,  wher 
ever  big  business  interests  are  liable  either  to  be  improp 
erly  favored  or  improperly  discriminated  against  and  black 
mailed  by  public  officials — and  the  result  is  just  as  vicious 
in  one  case  as  in  the  other — the  boss  is  almost  certain  to 
develop.  The  best  way  of  getting  at  this  type  of  boss  is  by 
keeping  the  public  conscience  aroused  and  alert,  so  that  it 
will  tolerate  neither  improper  attack  upon,  nor  improper 
favoritism  towards,  these  corporations,  and  will  quickly 
punish  any  public  servant  guilty  of  either. 

There  is  often  much  good  in  the  type  of  boss,  especially 
common  in  big  cities,  who  fulfills  towards  the  people  of  his 
district  in  rough  and  ready  fashion  the  position  of  friend 
and  protector.  He  uses  his  influence  to  get  jobs  for  young 
men  who  need  them.  He  goes  into  court  for  a  wild  young 
fellow  who  has  gotten  into  trouble.  He  helps  out  with  cash 
or  credit  the  widow  who  is  in  straits,  or  the  breadwinner 
who  is  crippled  or  for  some  other  cause  temporarily  out  of 
work.  He  organizes  clambakes  and  chowder  parties  and 
picnics,  and  is  consulted  by  the  local  labor  leaders  when  a 
cut  in  wages  is  threatened.  For  some  of  his  constituents 
he  does  proper  favors,  and  for  others  wholly  improper 
favors ;  but  he  preserves  human  relations  with  all.  He  may 
be  a  very  bad  and  very  corrupt  man,  a  man  whose  action  in 
blackmailing  and  protecting  vice  is  of  far-reaching  damage 
to  his  constituents.  But  these  constituents  are  for  the  most 
part  men  and  women  who  struggle  hard  against  poverty  and 
with  whom  the  problem  of  living  is  very  real  and  very 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  151 

close.  They  would  prefer  clean  and  honest  government,  if 
this  clean  and  honest  government  is  accompanied  by  human 
sympathy,  human  understanding.  But  an  appeal  made  to 
them  for  virtue  in  the  abstract,  an  appeal  made  by  good 
men  who  do  not  really  understand  their  needs,  will  often 
pass  quite  unheeded,  if  on  the  other  side  stands  the  boss, 
the  friend  and  benefactor,  who  may  have  been  guilty  of 
much  wrong-doing  in  things  that  they  are  hardly  aware 
concern  them,  but  who  appeals  to  them,  not  only  for  the 
sake  of  favors  to  come,  but  in  the  name  of  gratitude  and 
loyalty,  and  above  all  of  understanding  and  fellow-feeling. 
They  have  a  feeling  of  clan-loyalty  to  him;  his  and  their 
relations  may* be  substantially  those  which  are  right  and 
proper  among  primitive  people  still  in  the  clan  stage  of 
moral  development.  The  successful  fight  against  this  type 
of  vicious  boss,  and  the  type  of  vicious  politics  which  pro 
duces  it,  can  be  made  only  by  men  who  have  a  genuine  fel 
low-feeling  for  and  understanding  of  the  people  for  and 
with  whom  they  are  to  work,  and  who  in  practical  fashion 
seek  their  social  and  industrial  benefit. 

There  are  communities  of  poor  men,  whose  lives  are  hard, 
in  which  the  boss,  though  he  would  be  out  of  place  in  a  more 
advanced  community,  if  fundamentally  an  honest  man, 
meets  a  real  need  which  would  otherwise  not  be  met.  Be 
cause  of  his  limitations  in  other  than  purely  local  matters 
it  may  be  our  duty  to  fight  such  a  boss ;  but  it  may  also  be 
our  duty  to  recognize,  within  his  limitations,  both  his  sin 
cerity  and  his  usefulness. 

Yet  again  even  the  boss  who  really  is  evil,  like  the  busi 
ness  man  who  really  is  evil,  may  on  certain  points  be  sound, 
and  be  doing  good  work.  It  may  be  the  highest  duty  of  the 
patriotic  public  servant  to  work  with  the  big  boss  or  the  big 
business  man  on  these  points,  while  refusing  to  work  with 
him  on  others.  In  the  same  way  there  are  many  self-styled 
reformers  whose  conduct  is  such  as  to  warrant  Tom  Keed's 
bitter  remark,  that  when  Dr.  Johnson  defined  patriotism 
as  the  last  refuge  of  a  scoundrel  he  was  ignorant  of  the 
infinite  possibilities  contained  in  the  word  reform.  Yet, 


152    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

none  the  less,  it  is  our  duty  to  work  for  the  reforms  these 
men  champion,  without  regard  to  the  misconduct  of  the  men 
themselves  on  other  points.  I  have  known  in  my  life  many 
big  business  men  and  many  big  political  bosses  who  often 
or  even  generally  did  evil,  but  who  on  some  occasions  and 
on  certain  issues  were  right.  I  never  hesitated  to  do  battle 
against  these  men  when  they  were  wrong ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  as  long  as  they  were  going  my  way  I  was  glad  to  have 
them  do  so.  To  have  repudiated  their  aid  when  they  were 
right  and  wrere  striving  for  a  right  end,  and  for  what  was  of 
benefit  to  the  people — no  matter  what  their  motives  may 
have  been — would  have  been  childish,  and  moreover  would 
have  itself  been  misconduct  against  the  people. 

My  duty  was  to  stand  with  every  one  while  he  was  right, 
and  to  stand  against  him  when  he  went  wrong;  and  this  I 
have  tried  to  do  as  regards  individuals  and  as  regards 
groups  of  individuals.  When  a  business  man  or  labor 
leader,  politician  or  reformer,  is  right,  I  support  him ;  when 
he  goes  wrong,  I  leave  him.  When  Mr.  Lorimer  upheld 
the  war  for  the  liberation  of  Cuba,  I  supported  him ;  when 
he  became  United  States  Senator  by  improper  methods,  I 
opposed  him.  The  principles  or  methods  which  the  Social 
ists  advocate  and  which  I  believe  to  be  in  the  interest  of 
the  people  I  support,  and  those  which  I  believe  to  be  against 
the  interest  of  the  people  I  oppose.  Moreover,  when  a  man 
has  done  evil,  but  changes,  and  works  for  decency  and 
righteousness,  and  when,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  the  change  is 
real  and  the  man's  conduct  sincere,  then  I  welcome  him  and 
work  heartily  with  him,  as  an  equal  with  an  equal.  For 
thirty  years  after  the  Civil  War  the  creed  of  mere  mate 
rialism  was  rampant  in  both  American  politics  and  Ameri 
can  business,  and  many,  many  strong  men,  in  accordance 
with  the  prevailing  commercial  and  political  morality,  did 
things  for  which  they  deserve  blame  and  condemnation; 
but  if  they  now  sincerely  change,  and  strive  for  better 
things,  it  is  unwise  and  unjust  to  bar  them  from  fellowship. 
So  long  as  they  work  for  evil,  smite  them  with  the  sword  of 
the  Lord  and  of  Gideon!  When  they  change  and  show 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  153 

their  faith  by  their  works,  remember  the  words  of  Ezekiel : 
''If  the  wicked  will  turn  from  all  the  sins  he  has  committed, 
and  keep  all  my  statutes,  and  do  that  ivhich  is  lawful  and 
right,  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die.  All  his  trans 
gressions  that  he  hath  committed,  they  shall  not  be  men 
tioned  unto  him :  in  his  righteousness  that  he  hath  done  he 
shall  live.  Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  should 
die !  saith  the  Lord  God ;  and  not  that  he  should  return  from 
his  ways  and  live?" 

Every  man  who  has  been  in  practical  politics  grows  to 
realize  that  politicians,  big  and  little,  are  no  more  all  of 
them  bad  than  they  are  all  of  them  good.  Many  of  these 
men  are  very  bad  men  indeed,  but  there  are  others  among 
them — and  some  among  those  held  up  to  special  obloquy, 
too — who,  even  although  they  may  have  done  much  that  is 
evil,  also  show  traits  of  sterling  worth  which  many  of  their 
critics  wholly  lack.  There  are  few  men  for  whom  I  have 
ever  felt  a  more  cordial  and  contemptuous  dislike  than  for 
some  of  the  bosses  and  big  professional  politicians  with 
whom  I  have  been  brought  into  contact.  On  the  other  hand, 
in  the  case  of  some  political  leaders  who  were  most  bitterly 
attacked  as  bosses,  I  grew  to  know  certain  sides  of  their 
characters  which  inspired  in  me  a  very  genuine  regard 
and  respect. 

To  read  much  of  the  assault  on  Senator  Hanna,  one  would 
have  thought  that  he  was  a  man  incapable  of  patriotism 
or  of  far-sighted  devotion  to  the  country's  good.  I  was 
brought  into  intimate  contact  with  him  only  during  the  two 
and  a  half  years  immediately  preceding  his  death.  I  was 
then  President,  and  perforce  watched  all  his  actions  at  close 
range.  During  that  time  he  showed  himself  to  be  a  man  of 
rugged  sincerity  of  purpose,  of  great  courage  and  loyalty, 
and  of  unswerving  devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  Nation 
and  the  people  as  he  saw  those  interests.  He  was  as  sin 
cerely  desirous  of  helping  laboring  men  as  of  helping  capi 
talists.  His  ideals  were  in  many  ways  not  my  ideals,  and 
there  were  points  where  both  by  temperament  and  by  con 
viction  we  were  far  apart  Before  this  time  he  had  always 


154    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY     r 

been  unfriendly  to  me ;  and  I  do  not  think  he  ever  grew  to 
like  me,  at  any  rate  not  until  the  very  end  of  his  life.  More 
over,  I  came  to  the  Presidency  under  circumstances  which, 
if  he  had  been  a  smaller  man,  would  inevitably  have  thrown 
him  into  violent  antagonism  to  me.  He  was  the  close  and 
intimate  friend  of  President  McKinley.  He  was  McKinley 's 
devoted  ally  and  follower,  and  his  trusted  adviser,  who  was 
in  complete  sympathy  with  him.  Partly  because  of  this 
friendship,  his  position  in  the  Senate  and  in  the  country 
was  unique. 

With  McKinley 's  sudden  death  Senator  Hanna  found 
himself  bereft  of  his  dearest  friend,  while  I,  who  had  just 
come  to  the  Presidency,  was  in  his  view  an  untried  man, 
whose  trustworthiness  on  many  public  questions  was  at 
least  doubtful.  Ordinarily,  as  has  been  shown,  not  only  in 
our  history,  but  in  the  history  of  all  other  countries,  in 
countless  instances,  over  and  over  again,  this  situation 
would  have  meant  suspicion,  ill  will,  and,  at  the  last,  open 
and  violent  antagonism.  Such  was  not  the  result,  in  this 
case,  primarily  because  Senator  Hanna  had  in  him  the 
quality  that  enabled  him  to  meet  a  serious  crisis  with  dig 
nity,  with  powder,  and  with  disinterested  desire  to  work  for 
the  common  good.  Within  a  few  days  of  my  accession  he 
called  on  me,  and  with  entire  friendliness  and  obvious  sin 
cerity,  but  also  with  entire  self-respect,  explained  that  he 
mourned  McKinley  as  probably  no  other  man  did;  that  he 
had  not  been  especially  my  friend,  but  that  he  wished  me  to 
understand  that  henceforward,  on  every  question  where  he 
could  conscientiously  support  me,  I  could  count  upon  his 
giving  me  as  loyal  aid  as  it  was  in  his  power  to  render.  He 
added  that  this  must  not  be  understood  as  committing  him 
to  favor  me  for  nomination  and  election,  because  that  mat 
ter  must  be  left  to  take  care  of  itself  as  events  should  de 
cide  ;  but  that,  aside  from  this,  what  he  said  was  to  be  taken 
literally ;  in  other  words,  he  would  do  his  best  to  make  my 
Administration  a  success  by  supporting  me  heartily  on 
every  point  on  which  he  conscientiously  could,  and  that  this 
I  could  count  upon.  He  kept  his  word  absolutely.  He  never 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  155 

became  especially  favorable  to  my  nomination ;  and  most  of 
his  close  friends  became  bitterly  opposed  to  me  and  used 
every  effort  to  persuade  him  to  try  to  bring  about  my  down 
fall.  Most  men  in  his  position  would  have  been  tempted  to 
try  to  make  capital  at  my  expense  by  antagonizing  me  and 
discrediting  me  so  as  to  make  my  policies  fail,  just  for  the 
sake  of  making  them  fail.  Senator  Hanna,  on  the  contrary, 
did  everything  possible  to  make  them  succeed.  He  kept  his 
word  in  the  letter  and  the  spirit,  and  on  every  point  on 
which  he  felt  conscientiously  able  to  support  me  he  gave  me 
the  heartiest  and  most  effective  support,  and  did  all  in  his 
power  to  make  my  Administration  a  success ;  and  this  with 
no  hope  of  any  reward  for  himself,  of  any  gratitude  from 
me,  or  of  any  appreciation  by  the  public  at  large,  but  solely 
because  he  deemed  such  action  necessary  for  the  well-being 
of  the  country  as  a  whole. 

My  experience  with  Senator  Quay  was  similar.  I  had  no 
personal  relations  with  him  before  I  was  President,  and 
knew  nothing  of  him  save  by  hearsay.  Soon  after  I  became 
President,  Senator  Quay  called  upon  me,  told  me  he  had 
known  me  very  slightly,  that  he  thought  most  men  who 
claimed  to  be  reformers  were  hypocrites,  but  that  he  deemed 
me  sincere,  that  he  thought  conditions  had  become  such  that 
aggressive  courage  and  honesty  were  necessary  in  order  to 
remedy  them,  that  he  believed  I  intended  to  be  a  good  and 
efficient  President,  and  that  to  the  best  of  his  ability  he 
would  support  me  in  making  my  Administration  a  success. 
He  kept  his  word  with  absolute  good  faith.  He  had  been 
in  the  Civil  War,  and  was  a  medal  of  honor  man;  and  I 
think  my  having  been  in  the  Spanish  War  gave  him  at  the 
outset  a  kindly  feeling  toward  me.  He  was  also  a  very  well- 
read  man — I  owe  to  him,  for  instance,  my  acquaintance 
with  the  writings  of  the  Finnish  novelist  Topelius.  Not 
only  did  he  support  me  on  almost  every  public  question  in 
which  I  was  most  interested — including,  I  am  convinced, 
every  one  on  which  he  felt  he  conscientiously  could  do  so — 
but  he  also  at  the  time  of  his  death  gave  a  striking  proof  of 
his  disinterested  desire  to  render  a  service  to  certain  poor 


156    THEODOKE    KOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY     ;; 

people,  and  this  under  conditions  in  which  not  only  would 
he  never  know  if  the  service  were  rendered  but  in  which  he 
had  no  reason  to  expect  that  his  part  in  it  would  ever  be 
made  known  to  any  other  man. 

Quay  was  descended  from  a  French  voyageur  who  had 
some  Indian  blood  in  him.  He  was  proud  of  this  Indian 
blood,  took  an  especial  interest  in  Indians,  and  whenever 
Indians  came  to  Washington  they  always  called  on  him. 
Once  during  my  Administration  a  delegation  of  Iroquois 
came  over  from  Canada  to  call  on  me  at  the  White  House. 
Their  visit  had  in  it  something  that  was  pathetic  as  well  as 
amusing.  They  represented  the  descendants  of  the  Six 
Nations,  who  fled  to  Canada  after  Sullivan  harried  their 
towns  in  the  Kevolutionary  War.  Now,  a  century  and  a 
quarter  later,  their  people  thought  that  they  would  like  to 
come  back  into  the  United  States ;  and  these  representatives 
had  called  upon  me  with  the  dim  hope  that  perhaps  I  could 
give  their  tribes  land  on  which  they  could  settle.  As  soon 
as  they  reached  Washington  they  asked  Quay  to  bring  them 
to  call  on  me,  which  he  did,  telling  me  that  of  course  their 
errand  was  hopeless  and  that  he  had  explained  as  much  to 
them,  but  that  they  would  like  me  to  extend  the  courtesy  of 
an  interview.  At  the  close  of  the  interview,  which  had  been 
conducted  with  all  the  solemnities  of  calumet  and  wampum, 
the  Indians  filed  out.  Quay,  before  following  them,  turned 
to  me  with  his  usual  emotionless  face  and  said,  "Good-by, 
Mr.  President;  this  reminds  one  of  the  Flight  of  a  Tartar 
Tribe,  doesn't  it?"  I  answered,  "So  you're  fond  of  De 
Quincey,  Senator?"  to  which  Quay  responded,  "Yes;  al 
ways  liked  De  Quincey;  good-by."  And  away  he  went  with 
the  tribesmen,  who  seemed  to  have  walked  out  of  a  remote 
past. 

Quay  had  become  particularly  concerned  about  the  Dela- 
wares  in  the  Indian  Territory.  He  felt  that  the  Interior 
Department  did  not  do  them  justice.  He  also  felt  that  his 
colleagues  of  the  Senate  took  no  interest  in  them.  When  in 
the  spring  of  1904  he  lay  in  his  house  mortally  sick,  he 
,sent  me  word  that  he  had  something  important  to  say  to  me, 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  157 

and  would  have  himself  carried  round  to  see  me.  I  sent 
back  word  not  to  think  of  doing  so,  and  that  on  my  way  back 
from  church  next  Sunday  I  would  stop  in  and  call  on  him. 
This  I  accordingly  did.  He  was  lying  in  his  bed,  death  writ 
ten  on  his  face.  He  thanked  me  for  coming,  and  then  ex 
plained  that,  as  he  was  on  the  point  of  death  and  knew  he 
would  never  return  to  "Washington — it  was  late  spring  and 
he  was  about  to  leave — he  wished  to  see  me  to  get  my  per 
sonal  promise  that,  after  he  died,  I  would  myself  look  after 
the  interests  of  the  Delaware  Indians.  He  added  that  he 
did  not  trust  the  Interior  Department — although  he  knew 
that  I  did  not  share  his  views  on  this  point — and  that  still 
less  did  he  believe  that  any  of  his  colleagues  in  the  Senate 
would  exert  themselves  in  the  interests  of  the  Delawares, 
and  that  therefore  he  wished  my  personal  assurance  that  I 
would  personally  see  that  no  injustice  was  done  them.  I 
told  him  I  would  do  so,  and  then  added,  in  rather  perfunc 
tory  fashion,  that  he  must  not  take  such  a  gloomy  view  of 
himself,  that  when  he  got  away  for  the  summer  I  hoped  he 
would  recover  and  be  back  all  right  when  Congress  opened. 
A  gleam  came  into  the  old  fighter 's  eyes  and  he  answered : 
"No,  I  am  dying,  and  you  know  it.  I  don't  mind  dying; 
but  I  do  wish  it  were  possible  for  me  to  get  off  into  the 
great  north  woods  and  crawl  out  on  a  rock  in  the  sun  and  die 
like  a  wolf!" 

I  never  saw  him  again.  When  he  died  I  sent  a  telegram 
of  sympathy  to  his  wife.  A  paper  which  constantly  preached 
reform,  and  which  kept  up  its  circulation  by  the  no  less  con 
stant  practice  of  slander,  a  paper  which  in  theory  con 
demned  all  public  men  who  violated  the  eighth  command 
ment,  and  in  practice  subsisted  by  incessant  violation  of  the 
ninth,  assailed  me  for  sending  my  message  to  the  dead 
man's  wife.  I  knew  the  editors  of  this  paper,  and  the  edi 
tor  who  was  their  predecessor.  They  had  led  lives  of  bodily 
ease  and  the  avoidance  of  bodily  risk;  they  earned  their 
livelihood  by  the  practice  of  mendacity  for  profit ;  and  they 
delivered  malignant  judgment  on  a  dead  man  who,  whatever 
his  faults,  had  in  his  youth  freely  risked  his  life  for  a  great 


158    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ideal,  and  who  when  death  was  already  clutching  his  breast 
had  spent  almost  his  last  breath  on  behalf  of  humble  and 
friendless  people  whom  he  had  served  with  disinterested 
loyalty. 

There  is  no  greater  duty  than  to  war  on  the  corrupt  and 
unprincipled  boss,  and  on  the  corrupt  and  unprincipled 
business  man;  and  for  the  matter  of  that,  on  the  corrupt 
and  unprincipled  labor  leader  also,  and  on  the  corrupt  and 
unprincipled  editor,  and  on  any  one  else  who  is  corrupt  and 
unprincipled.  But  where  the  conditions  are  such,  whether 
in  politics  or  in  business,  that  the  great  majority  of  men 
have  behaved  in  a  way  which  is  gradually  seen  to  be  im 
proper,  but  which  at  one  time  did  not  conflict  with  the  gen 
erally  accepted  morality,  then  the  warfare  on  the  system 
should  not  include  warfare  on  the  men  themselves,  unless 
they  decline  to  amend  their  ways  and  to  dissociate  them 
selves  from  the  system.  There  are  many  good,  unimagina 
tive  citizens  who  in  politics  or  in  business  act  in  accordance 
with  accepted  standards,  in  a  matter-of-course  way,  with 
out  questioning  these  standards;  until  something  happens 
which  sharply  arouses  them  to  the  situation,  whereupon 
they  try  to  work  for  better  things.  The  proper  course  in 
such  event  is  to  let  bygones  be  bygones,  and  if  the  men  prove 
by  their  actions  the  sincerity  of  their  conversion,  heartily 
to  work  with  them  for  the  betterment  of  business  and  politi 
cal  conditions. 

By  the  time  that  I  was  ending  my  career  as  Civil  Service 
Commissioner  I  was  already  growing  to  understand  that 
mere  improvement  in  political  conditions  by  itself  was  not 
enough.  I  dimly  realized  that  an  even  greater  fight  must 
be  waged  to  improve  economic  conditions,  and  to  secure 
social  and  industrial  justice,  justice  as  between  individuals 
and  justice  as  between  classes.  I  began  to  see  that  political 
effort  was  largely  valuable  as  it  found  expression  and  re 
sulted  in  such  social  and  industrial  betterment.  I  was 
gradually  puzzling  out,  or  trying  to  puzzle  out,  the  answers 
to  various  questions — some  as  yet  unsolvable  to  any  of  us, 
but  for  the  solution  of  which  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  all  of 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  159 

ns  to  work.  I  had  grown  to  realize  very  keenly  that  the 
duty  of  the  Government  to  protect  women  and  children  must 
be  extended  to  include  the  protection  of  all  the  crushable 
elements  of  labor.  I  saw  that  it  was  the  affair  of  all  our 
people  to  see  that  justice  obtained  between  the  big  corpora 
tion  and  its  employees,  and  between  the  big  corporation 
and  its  smaller  rivals,  as  well  as  its  customers  and  the  gen 
eral  public.  I  saw  that  it  was  the  affair  of  all  of  us,  and  not 
only  of  the  employer,  if  dividends  went  up  and  wages  went 
down ;  that  it  was  to  the  interest  of  all  of  us  that  a  full  share 
of  the  benefit  of  improved  machinery  should  go  to  the  work 
man  who  used  the  machinery;  and  also  that  it  was  to  the 
interest  of  all  of  us  that  each  man,  whether  brain  worker 
or  hand  worker,  should  do  the  best  work  of  which  he  was 
capable,  and  that  there  should  be  some  correspondence  be 
tween  the  value  of  the  work  and  the  value  of  the  reward. 
It  is  these  and  many  similar  questions  which  in  their  sum 
make  up  the  great  social  and  industrial  problems  of  to-day, 
the  most  interesting  and  important  of  the  problems  with 
which  our  public  life  must  deal. 

In  handling  these  problems  I  believe  that  much  can  be 
done  by  the  Government.  Furthermore,  I  believe  that, 
after  all  that  the  Government  can  do  has  been  done,  there 
will  remain  as  the  most  vital  of  all  factors  the  individual 
character  of  the  average  man  and  the  average  woman.  No 
governmental  action  can  do  more  than  supplement  individ 
ual  action.  Moreover,  there  must  be  collective  action  of 
kinds  distinct  from  governmental  action.  A  body  of  public 
opinion  must  be  formed,  must  make  itself  felt,  and  in  the 
end  transform,  and  be  transformed  by,  the  gradual  raising 
of  individual  standards  of  conduct. 

It  is  curious  to  see  how  difficult  it  is  to  make  some  men 
understand  that  insistence  upon  one  factor  does  not  and 
must  not  mean  failure  fully  to  recognize  other  factors.  The 
selfish  individual  needs  to  be  taught  that  we  must  now 
shackle  cunning  by  law  exactly  as  a  few  centuries  back  we 
shackled  force  by  law.  Unrestricted  individualism  spells 
ruin  to  the  individual  himself.  But  so  does  the  elimination 


160    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT—AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

of  individualism,  whether  by  law  or  custom.  It  is  a  capital 
error  to  fail  to  recognize  the  vital  need  of  good  laws.  It  is 
also  a  capital  error  to  believe  that  good  laws  will  accomplish 
anything  unless  the  average  man  has  the  right  stuff  in  him. 
The  toiler,  the  manual  laborer,  has  received  less  than  jus 
tice,  and  he  must  be  protected,  both  by  law,  by  custom,  and 
by  the  exercise  of  his  right  to  increase  his  wage;  and  yet 
to  decrease  the  quantity  and  quality  of  his  work  will  work 
only  evil.  There  must  be  a  far  greater  meed  of  respect  and 
reward  for  the  hand  worker  than  we  now  give  him,  if  our 
society  is  to  be  put  on  a  sound  basis ;  and  this  respect  and 
reward  cannot  be  given  him  unless  he  is  as  ambitious  to  do 
the  best  possible  work  as  is  the  highest  type  of  brain  worker, 
whether  doctor  or  writer  or  artist.  There  must  be  a  raising 
of  standards,  and  not  a  leveling  down  to  the  standard  of  the 
poorest  and  most  inefficient.  There  is  urgent  need  of  in 
telligent  governmental  action  to  assist  in  making  the  life 
of  the  man  who  tills  the  soil  all  that  it  should  be,  and  to  see 
that  the  manual  worker  gets  his  full  share  of  the  reward  for 
what  he  helps  produce;  but  if  either  farmer,  mechanic,  or 
day  laborer  is  shiftless  or  lazy,  if  he  shirks  downright  hard 
work,  if  he  is  stupid  or  self-indulgent,  then  no  law  can  save 
him,  and  he  must  give  way  to  a  better  type. 

I  suppose  that  some  good  people  will  misunderstand  what 
I  say,  and  will  insist  on  taking  only  half  of  it  as  represent 
ing  the  whole.  Let  me  repeat.  When  I  say,  that,  even  after 
we  have  all  the  good  laws  necessary,  the  chief  factor  in  any 
given  man's  success  or  failure  must  be  that  man's  own  char 
acter,  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  I  am  in  the  least  mini 
mizing  the  importance  of  these  laws,  the  real  and  vital  need 
for  them.  The  struggle  for  individual  advancement  and 
development  can  be  brought  to  naught,  or  indefinitely 
retarded,  by  the  absence  of  law  or  by  bad  law.  It  can  be 
immeasurably  aided  by  organized  effort  on  the  part  of  the 
State.  Collective  action  and  individual  action,  public  law 
and  private  character,  are  both  necessary.  It  is  only  by 
a  slow  and  patient  inward  transformation  such  as  these 
laws  aid  in  bringing  about  that  men  are  really  helped  up- 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  161 

ward  in  their  struggle  for  a  higher  and  a  fuller  life.  Recog 
nition  of  individual  character  as  the  most  important  of  all 
factors  does  not  mean  failure  fully  to  recognize  that  we 
must  have  good  laws,  and  that  we  must  have  our  best  men 
in  office  to  enforce  these  laws.  The  Nation  collectively  will 
in  this  way  be  able  to  be  of  real  and  genuine  service  to  each 
of  us  individually;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  wisdom  of 
the  collective  action  will  mainly  depend  on  the  high  individ 
ual  average  of  citizenship. 

The  relationship  of  man  and  woman  is  the  fundamental 
relationship  that  stands  at  the  base  of  the  whole  social  struc 
ture.  Much  can  be  done  by  law  towards  putting  women  on 
a  footing  of  complete  and  entire  equal  rights  with  man — 
including  the  right  to  vote,  the  right  to  hold  and  use  prop 
erty,  and  the  right  to  enter  any  profession  she  desires  on 
the  same  terms  as  a  man.  Yet  when  this  has  been  done  it 
will  amount  to  little  unless  on  the  one  hand  the  man  himself 
realizes  his  duty  to  the  woman,  and  unless  on  the  other  hand 
the  woman  realizes  that  she  has  no  claim  to  rights  unless 
she  performs  the  duties  that  go  with  those  rights  and 
that  alone  justify  her  in  appealing  to  them.  A  cruel,  selfish, 
or  licentious  man  is  an  abhorrent  member  of  the  commu 
nity  ;  but,  after  all,  his  actions  are  no  worse  in  the  long  run 
than  those  of  the  woman  who  is  content  to  be  a  parasite  on 
others,  who  is  cold,  selfish,  caring  for  nothing  but  frivolous 
pleasure  and  ignoble  ease.  The  law  of  worthy  effort,  the 
law  of  service  for  a  worthy  end,  without  regard  to  whether 
it  brings  pleasure  or  pain,  is  the  only  right  law  of  life, 
whether  for  man  or  for  woman.  The  man  must  not  be  self 
ish;  nor,  if  the  woman  is  wise,  will  she  let  the  man  grow 
selfish,  and  this  not  only  for  her  own  sake  but  for  his.  One 
of  the  prime  needs  is  to  remember  that  almost  every  duty 
is  composed  of  two  seemingly  conflicting  elements,  and  that 
over-insistence  on  one,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other,  may  de 
feat  its  own  end.  Any  man  who  studies  the  statistics  of  the 
birth-rate  among  the  native  Americans  of  New  England,  or 
among  the  native  French  of  France,  needs  not  to  be  told 
that  when  prudence  and  forethought  are  carried  to  the  point 


162    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

of  cold  selfishness  and  self-indulgence,  the  race  is  bound  to 
disappear.  Taking  into  account  the  women  who  for  good 
reasons  do  not  marry,  or  who  when  married  are  childless  or 
are  able  to  have  but  one  or  two  children,  it  is  evident  that 
the  married  woman  able  to  have  children  must  on  an  aver 
age  have  four  or  the  race  will  not  perpetuate  itself.  This 
is  the  mere  statement  of  a  self-evident  truth.  Yet  foolish 
and  self-indulgent  people  often  resent  this  statement  as  if  it 
were  in  some  way  possible  by  denunciation  to  reverse  the 
facts  of  nature;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  improvident  and 
shiftless  people,  inconsiderate  and  brutal  people,  treat  the 
statement  as  if  it  justified  heads  of  families  in  having  enor 
mous  numbers  of  badly  nourished,  badly  brought  up,  and 
badly  cared  for  children  for  whom  they  make  no  effort  to 
provide.  A  man  must  think  well  before  he  marries.  He 
must  be  a  tender  and  considerate  husband  and  realize  that 
there  is  no  other  human  being  to  whom  he  owes  so  much  of 
love  and  regard  and  consideration  as  he  does  to  the  woman 
who  with  pain  bears  and  with  labor  rears  the  children  that 
are  his.  No  words  can  paint  the  scorn  and  contempt  which 
must  be  felt  by  all  right-thinking  men,  not  only  for  the 
brutal  husband,  but  for  the  husband  who  fails  to  show  full 
loyalty  and  consideration  to  his  wife.  Moreover,  he  must 
work,  he  must  do  his  part  in  the  world.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  woman  must  realize  that  she  has  no  more  right  to  shirk 
the  business  of  wifehood  and  motherhood  than  the  man  has 
to  shirk  his  business  as  breadwinner  for  the  household. 
Women  should  have  free  access  to  every  field  of  labor  which 
they  care  to  enter,  and  when  their  work  is  as  valuable  as 
that  of  a  man  it  should  be  paid  as  highly.  Yet  normally  for 
the  man  and  the  woman  whose  welfare  is  more  important 
than  the  welfare  of  any  other  human  beings,  the  woman 
must  remain  the  housemother,  the  homekeeper,  and  the  man 
must  remain  the  breadwinner,  the  provider  for  the  wife 
who  bears  his  children  and  for  the  children  she  brings  into 
the  world.  No  other  work  is  as  valuable  or  as  exacting  for 
either  man  or  woman;  it  must  always,  in  every  healthy 
society,  be  for  both  man  and  woman  the  prime  work,  the 


APPLIED   IDEALISM  163 

most  important  work ;  normally  all  other  work  is  of  second 
ary  importance,  and  must  come  as  an  addition  to,  not  a 
substitute  for,  this  primary  work.  The  partnership  should 
be  one  of  equal  rights,  one  of  love,  of  self-respect  and  un 
selfishness,  above  all  a  partnership  for  the  performance  of 
the  most  vitally  important  of  all  duties.  The  performance 
of  duty,  and  not  an  indulgence  in  vapid  ease  and  vapid 
pleasure,  is  all  that  makes  life  worth  while. 

Suffrage  for  women  should  be  looked  on  from  this  stand 
point.  Personally  I  feel  that  it  is  exactly  as  much  a  ' '  right ' ' 
of  women  as  of  men  to  vote.  But  the  important  point  with 
both  men  and  women  is  to  treat  the  exercise  of  the  suffrage 
as  a  duty,  which,  in  the  long  run,  must  be  well  performed 
to  be  of  the  slightest  value.  I  always  favored  woman 's  suf 
frage,  but  only  tepidly,  until  my  association  with  women  like 
Jane  Addams  and  Frances  Kellor,  who  desired  it  as  one 
means  of  enabling  them  to  render  better  and  more  efficient 
service,  changed  me  into  a  zealous  instead  of  a  lukewarm 
adherent  of  the  cause — in  spite  of  the  fact  that  a  few  of  the 
best  women  of  the  same  type,  women  like  Mary  Antin,  did 
not  favor  the  movement.  A  vote  is  like  a  rifle:  its  useful 
ness  depends  upon  the  character  of  the  user.  The  mere 
possession  of  the  vote  will  no  more  benefit  men  and  women 
not  sufficiently  developed  to  use  it  than  the  possession  of 
rifles  will  turn  untrained  Egyptian  fellaheen  into  soldiers. 
This  is  as  true  of  woman  as  of  man — and  no  more  true. 
Universal  suffrage  in  Hayti  has  not  made  the  Haytians  able 
to  govern  themselves  in  any  true  sense ;  and  woman  suffrage 
in  Utah  in  no  shape  or  way  affected  the  problem  of  polyg 
amy.  I  believe  in  suffrage  for  women  in  America,  because 
I  think  they  are  fit  for  it.  I  believe  for  women,  as  for  men, 
more  in  the  duty  of  fitting  one's  self  to  do  well  and  wisely 
with  the  ballot  than  in  the  naked  right  to  cast  the  ballot. 

I  wish  that  people  would  read  books  like  the  novels  and 
stories,  at  once  strong  and  charming,  of  Henry  Bordeaux, 
books  like  Kathleen  Norris's  "Mother,"  and  Cornelia  Com 
er's  "Preliminaries,"  and  would  use  these,  and  other  such 
books,  as  tracts,  now  and  then !  Perhaps  the  following  cor- 


164    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

respondence  will  give  a  better  idea  than  I  can  otherwise  give 
of  the  problems  that  in  everyday  life  come  before  men  and 
women,  and  of  the  need  that  the  man  shall  show  himself  un 
selfish  and  considerate,  and  do  his  full  share  of  the  joint 
duty: 

January  3,  1913. 
Colonel  Theodore  Roosevelt: 

Dear  Sir — I  suppose  yon  are  willing  to  stand  sponsor 
for  the  assertion  that  the  women  of  the  country  are  not  do 
ing  their  duty  unless  they  have  large  families.  I  wonder  if 
you  know  the  real  reason,  after  all.  Society  and  clubs  are 
held  largely  to  blame,  but  society  really  takes  in  so  few 
people,  after  all.  I  thought,  when  I  got  married  at  twenty, 
that  it  was  the  proper  thing  to  have  a  family,  and,  as  we 
had  very  little  of  this  world's  goods,  also  thought  it  the 
thing  to  do  all  the  necessary  work  for  them.  I  have  had 
nine  children,  did  all  my  own  work,  including  washing,  iron 
ing,  house-cleaning,  and  the  care  of  the  little  ones  as  they 
came  along,  which  was  about  every  two  years;  also  sewed 
everything  they  wore,  including  trousers  for  the  boys  and 
caps  and  jackets  for  the  girls  while  little.  I  also  helped 
them  all  in  their  school  work,  and  started  them  in  music, 
etc.  But  as  they  grew  older  I  got  behind  the  times.  I  never 
belonged  to  a  club  or  a  society  or  lodge,  nor  went  to  any 
one's  house  scarcely;  there  wasn't  time.  In  consequence,  I 
knew  nothing  that  was  going  on  in  the  town,  much  less  the 
events  of  the  country,  and  at  the  same  time  my  husband 
kept  growing  in  wisdom  and  knowledge,  from  mixing  with 
men  and  hearing  topics  of  the  times  discussed.  At  the  be 
ginning  of  our  married  life  I  had  just  as  quick  a  mind  to 
grasp  things  as  he  did,  and  had  more  school  education,  hav 
ing  graduated  from  a  three  years '  high  school.  My  husband 
more  and  more  declined  to  discuss  things  with  me;  as  he 
said,  "I  didn't  know  anything  about  it."  When  I'd  ask, 
he  'd  say,  ' '  Oh,  you  wouldn  't  understand  if  I  'd  tell  you. ' '  So 
here  I  am,  at  forty-five  years,  hopelessly  dull  and  uninter 
esting,  while  he  can  mix  with  the  brightest  minds  in  the 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  165 

country  as  an  equal.  He's  a  strong  Progressive  man,  took 
very  active  part  in  the  late  campaign,  etc.  I  am  also  Pro 
gressive,  and  tried  my  best,  after  so  many  years  of  shut-in 
life,  to  grasp  the  ideas  you  stood  for,  and  read  everything 
I  could  find  during  the  summer  and  fall.  But  I've  been  out 
of  touch  with  people  too  long  now,  and  my  husband  would 
much  rather  go  and  talk  to  some  woman  who  hasn't  had  any 
children,  because  she  knows  things  (I  am  not  specifying  any 
particular  woman).  I  simply  bore  him  to  death  because 
I'm  not  interesting.  Now,  tell  me,  how  was  it  my  fault? 
I  was  only  doing  what  I  thought  was  my  duty.  No  woman 
can  keep  up  with  things  who  never  talks  with  any  one  but 
young  children.  As  soon  as  my  children  grew  up  they  took 
the  same  attitude  as  their  father,  and  frequently  say,  "Oh, 
mother  doesn't  know/'  They  look  up  to  and  admire  their 
father  because  he 's  a  man  of  the  world  and  knows  how  to  act 
when  he  goes  out.  How  can  I  urge  my  daughters  now  to  go 
and  raise  large  families?  It  means  by  the  time  you  have 
lost  your  figure  and  charm  for  them  they  are  all  ashamed  of 
you.  Now,  as  a  believer  in  woman's  rights,  do  a  little  talk 
ing  to  the  men  as  to  their  duties  to  their  wives,  or  else  re 
frain  from  urging  us  women  to  have  children.  I  am  only 
one  of  thousands  of  middle-class  respectable  women  who 
give  their  lives  to  raise  a  nice  family,  and  then  who  be 
come  bitter  from  the  injustice  done  us.  Don't  let  this  go 
into  the  waste-basket,  but  think  it  over.  Yours  respect 
fully,  . 

New  York,  January  11,  1913. 
My  Dear  Mrs. : 

Most  certainly  your  letter  will  not  go  into  the  waste- 
paper  basket.  I  shall  think  it  over  and  show  it  to  Mrs. 
Eoosevelt.  Will  you  let  me  say,  in  the  first  place,  that  a 
woman  who  can  write  such  a  letter  is  certainly  not  "hope 
lessly  dull  and  uninteresting"!  If  the  facts  are  as  you 
state,  then  I  do  not  wonder  that  you  feel  bitterly  and  that 
you  feel  that  the  gravest  kind  of  injustice  has  been  done  you. 
I  have  always  tried  to  insist  to  men  that  they  should  do 


166    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

their  duty  to  the  women  even  more  than  the  women  to 
them.  Now  I  hardly  like  to  write  specifically  about  your 
husband,  because  you  might  not  like  it  yourself.  It  seems 
to  me  almost  incredible  that  any  man  who  is  the  husband  of 
a  woman  who  has  borne  him  nine  children  should  not  feel 
that  they  and  he  are  lastingly  her  debtors.  You  say  that 
you  have  had  nine  children,  that  you  did  all  your  own  work, 
including  washing,  ironing,  house-cleaning,  and  the  care  of 
the  little  ones  as  they  came  along ;  that  you  sewed  every 
thing  they  wore,  including  trousers  for  the  boys  and  caps 
and  jackets  for  the  girls  while  little ;  that  you  helped  them 
all  in  their  school  work  and  started  them  in  music ;  but  that 
as  they  grew  older  you  got  behind  the  times,  that  you  never 
belonged  to  a  club  or  society  or  lodge,  nor  went  to  any  one 's 
house,  as  you  hardly  had  time  to  do  so ;  and  that  in  conse 
quence  your  husband  outgrew  you,  and  that  your  children 
look  up  to  him  and  not  to  you  and  feel  that  they  have  out 
grown  you.  If  these  facts  are  so,  you  have  done  a  great  and 
wonderful  work,  and  the  only  explanation  I  can  possibly 
give  of  the  attitude  you  describe  on  the  part  of  your  hus 
band  and  children  is  that  they  do  not  understand  what  it  is 
that  you  have  done.  I  emphatically  believe  in  unselfishness, 
but  I  also  believe  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  let  other  people 
grow  selfish,  even  when  the  other  people  are  husband  and 
children. 

Now,  I  suggest  that  you  take  your  letter  to  me,  of  which 
I  send  you  back  a  copy,  and  this  letter,  and  then  select  out 
of  your  family  the  one  with  whom  you  feel  most  sympathy, 
whether  it  is  your  husband  or  one  of  your  children.  Show 
the  two  letters  to  him  or  her,  and  then  have  a  frank  talk 
about  the  matter.  If  any  man,  as  you  say,  becomes  ashamed 
of  his  wife  because  she  has  lost  her  figure  in  bearing  his 
children,  then  that  man  is  a  hound  and  has  every  cause  to 
be  ashamed  of  himself.  I  am  sending  you  a  little  book 
called  "Mother,"  by  Kathleen  Norris,  which  will  give  you 
my  views  on  the  matter.  Of  course  there  are  base  and  self 
ish  men,  just  as  there  are,  although  I  believe  in  smaller 
number,  base  and  selfish  women.  Man  and  woman  alike 


APPLIED    IDEALISM  167 

should  profit  by  the  teachings  in  such  a  story  as  this  of 
"Mother." 

Sincerely  yours, 

THEODORE  ROOSEVELT. 

January  21,  1913. 
Colonel  Theodore  Roosevelt: 

My  dear  Sir — Your  letter  came  as  a  surprise,  for  I  wasn't 
expecting  an  answer.  The  next  day  the  book  came,  and  I 
thank  you  for  your  ready  sympathy  and  understanding.  I 
feel  as  though  you  and  Mrs.  Roosevelt  would  think  I  was 
hardly  loyal  to  my  husband  and  children ;  but  knowing  of  no 
other  way  to  bring  the  idea  which  was  so  strong  in  my  mind 
to  your  notice,  I  told  my  personal  story.  If  it  will,  in  a  small 
measure,  be  the  means  of  helping  some  one  else  by  molding 
public  opinion,  through  you,  I  shall  be  content.  You  have 
helped  me  more  than  you  know.  Just  having  you  interested 
is  as  good  as  a  tonic,  and  braces  me  up  till  I  feel  as  though  I 
shall  refuse  to  be  "laid  on  the  shelf."  ...  To  think  that 
you'd  bother  to  send  me  a  book.  I  shall  always  treasure  it 
both  for  the  text  of  the  book  and  the  sender.  I  read  it  with 
absorbing  interest.  The  mother  was  so  splendid.  She  was 
ideal.  The  situations  are  so  startlingly  real,  just  like  what 
happens  here  every  day  with  variations. . 

A  narrative  of  facts  is  often  more  convincing  than  a 
homily;  and  these  two  letters  of  my  correspondent  carry 
their  own  lesson. 

Parenthetically,  let  me  remark  that  whenever  a  man 
thinks  that  he  has  outgrown  the  woman  who  is  his  mate,  he 
will  do  well  carefully  to  consider  whether  his  growth  has  not 
been  downward  instead  of  upward,  whether  the  facts  are 
not  merely  that  he  has  fallen  away  from  his  wife 's  standard 
of  refinement  and  of  duty. 


CHAPTER   VI 

THE   NEW   YORK   POLICE 

Isr  the  spring  of  1895  I  was  appointed  by  Mayor  Strong  Po 
lice  Commissioner,  and  I  served  as  President  of  the  Police 
Commission  of  New  York  for  the  two  following  years. 
Mayor  Strong  had  been  elected  Mayor  the  preceding  fall, 
when  the  general  anti-Democratic  wave  of  that  year  coin 
cided  with  one  of  the  city's  occasional  insurrections  of 
virtue  and  consequent  turning  out  of  Tammany  from  mu 
nicipal  control.  He  had  been  elected  on  a  non-partisan 
ticket — usually  (although  not  always)  the  right  kind  of 
ticket  in  municipal  affairs,  provided  it  represents  not  a 
bargain  among  factions  but  genuine  non-partisanship  with 
the  genuine  purpose  to  get  the  right  men  in  control  of  the 
city  government  on  a  platform  which  deals  with  the  needs 
of  the  average  men  and  women,  the  men  and  women  who 
work  hard  and  who  too  often  live  hard.  I  was  appointed 
with  the  distinct  understanding  that  I  was  to  administer 
the  Police  Department  with  entire  disregard  of  partisan 
politics,  and  only  from  the  standpoint  of  a  good  citizen  in 
terested  in  promoting  the  welfare  of  all  good  citizens.  My 
task,  therefore,  was  really  simple.  Mayor  Strong  had  al 
ready  offered  me  the  Street-Cleaning  Department.  For 
this  work  I  did  not  feel  that  I  had  any  especial  fitness.  I 
resolutely  refused  to  accept  the  position,  and  the  Mayor 
ultimately  got  a  far  better  man  for  his  purpose  in  Colonel 
George  F.  Waring.  The  work  of  the  Police  Department, 
however,  was  in  my  line,  and  I  was  glad  to  undertake  it. 

The  man  who  was  closest  to  me  throughout  my  two  years 
in  the  Police  Department  was  Jacob  Eiis.  By  this  time, 
as  I  have  said,  I  was  getting  our  social,  industrial,  and 
political  needs  into  pretty  fair  perspective.  I  was  still 

168 


THE    NEW   YORK   POLICE  169 

ignorant  of  the  extent  to  which  big  men  of  great  wealth 
played  a  mischievous  part  in  our  industrial  and  social  life, 
but  I  was  well  awake  to  the  need  of  making  ours  in  good 
faith  both  an  economic  and  an  industrial  as  well  as  a  polit 
ical  democracy.  I  already  knew  Jake  Riis,  because  his  book 
"How  the  Other  Half  Lives"  had  been  to  me  both  an  en 
lightenment  and  an  inspiration  for  which  I  felt  I  could 
never  be  too  grateful.  Soon  after  it  was  written  I  had 
called  at  his  office  to  tell  him  how  deeply  impressed  I  was 
by  the  book,  and  that  I  wished  to  help  him  in  any  practical 
way  to  try  to  make  things  a  little  better.  I  have  always  had 
a  horror  of  words  that  are  not  translated  into  deeds,  of 
speech  that  does  not  result  in  action — in  other  words,  I  be 
lieve  in  realizable  ideals  and  in  realizing  them,  in  preaching 
what  can  be  practiced  and  then  in  practicing  it.  Jacob  Biis 
had  drawn  an  indictment  of  the  things  that  were  wrong, 
pitifully  and  dreadfully  wrong,  with  the  tenement  homes 
and  the  tenement  lives  of  our  wage-workers.  In  his  book 
he  had  pointed  out  how  the  city  government,  and  especially 
those  connected  with  the  departments  of  police  and  health, 
could  aid  in  remedying  some  of  the  wrongs. 

As  President  of  the  Police  Board  I  was  also  a  member 
of  the  Health  Board.  In  both  positions  I  felt  that  with 
Jacob  Eiis  's  guidance  I  would  be  able  to  put  a  goodly  num 
ber  of  his  principles  into  actual  effect.  He  and  I  looked  at 
life  and  its  problems  from  substantially  the  same  stand 
point.  Our  ideals  and  principles  and  purposes,  and  our 
beliefs  as  to  the  methods  necessary  to  realize  them,  were 
alike.  After  the  election  in  1894  I  had  written  him  a  letter 
which  ran  in  part  as  follows : 

It  is  very  important  to  the  city  to  have  a  business  man's 
Mayor,  but  it  is  more  important  to  have  a  workingman's 
Mayor ;  and  I  want  Mr.  Strong  to  be  that  also.  .  .  .  It  is  an 
excellent  thing  to  have  rapid  transit,  but  it  is  a  good  deal 
more  important,  if  you  look  at  matters  with  a  proper  per 
spective,  to  have  ample  playgrounds  in  the  poorer  quarters 
of  the  city,  and  to  take  the  children  off  the  streets  so  as  to 


170    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

prevent  them  growing  up  toughs.  In  the  same  way  it  is  an 
admirable  thing  to  have  clean  streets ;  indeed,  it  is  an  essen 
tial  thing  to  have  them;  but  it  would  be  a  better  thing  to 
have  our  schools  large  enough  to  give  ample  accommoda 
tion  to  all  who  should  be  pupils  and  to  provide  them  with 
proper  playgrounds. 

And  I  added,  while  expressing  my  regret  that  I  had  not 
been  able  to  accept  the  street-cleaning  commissionership, 
that  "I  would  have  been  delighted  to  smash  up  the  corrupt 
contractors  and  put  the  street-cleaning  force  absolutely 
out  of  the  domain  of  politics." 

This  was  nineteen  years  ago,  but  it  makes  a  pretty  good 
platform  in  municipal  politics  even  to-day — smash  corrup 
tion,  take  the  municipal  service  out  of  the  domain  of  poli 
tics,  insist  upon  having  a  Mayor  who  shall  be  a  working- 
man's  Mayor  even  more  than  a  business  man's  Mayor,  and 
devote  all  attention  possible  to  the  welfare  of  the  children. 

Therefore,  as  I  viewed  it,  there  were  two  sides  to  the 
work :  first,  the  actual  handling  of  the  Police  Department ; 
second,  using  my  position  to  help  in  making  the  city  a  better 
place  in  which  to  live  and  work  for  those  to  whom  the  condi 
tions  of  life  and  labor  were  hardest.  The  two  problems 
were  closely  connected ;  for  one  thing  never  to  be  forgotten 
in  striving  to  better  the  conditions  of  the  New  York  police 
force  is  the  connection  between  the  standard  of  morals  and 
behavior  in  that  force  and  the  general  standard  of  morals 
and  behavior  in  the  city  at  large.  The  form  of  government 
of  the  Police  Department  at  that  time  was  such  as  to  make 
it  a  matter  of  extreme  difficulty  to  get  good  results.  It 
represented  that  device  of  old-school  American  political 
thought,  the  desire  to  establish  checks  and  balances  so  elab 
orate  that  no  man  shall  have  power  enough  to  do  anything 
very  bad.  In  practice  this  always  means  that  no  man  has 
power  enough  to  do  anything  good,  and  that  what  is  bad 
is  done  anyhow. 

In  most  positions  the  "division  of  powers "  theory  works 
unmitigated  mischief.  The  only  way  to  get  good  service 
is  to  give  somebody  power  to  render  it,  facing  the  fact  that 


THE   NEW   YOEK   POLICE  171 

power  which  will  enable  a  man  to  do  a  job  well  will  also 
necessarily  enable  him  to  do  it  ill  if  he  is  the  wrong  kind  of 
man.  What  is  normally  needed  is  the  concentration  in  the 
hands  of  one  man,  or  of  a  very  small  body  of  men,  of  ample 
power  to  enable  him  or  them  to  do  the  work  that  is  neces 
sary;  and  then  the  devising  of  means  to  hold  these  men 
fully  responsible  for  the  exercise  of  that  power  by  the 
people.  This  of  course  means  that,  if  the  people  are  willing 
to  see  power  misused,  it  will  be  misused.  But  it  also  means 
that  if,  as  we  hold,  the  people  are  fit  for  self-government — 
if,  in  other  words,  our  talk  and  our  institutions  are  not 
shams — we  will  get  good  government.  I  do  not  contend 
that  my  theory  will  automatically  bring  good  government. 
I  do  contend  that  it  will  enable  us  to  get  as  good  govern 
ment  as  we  deserve,  and  that  the  other  way  will  not. 

The  then  government  of  the  Police  Department  was  so 
devised  as  to  render  it  most  difficult  to  accomplish  anything 
good,  while  the  field  for  intrigue  and  conspiracy  was  limit 
less.  There  were  four  Commissioners,  two  supposed  to  be 
long  to  one  party  and  two  to  the  other,  although,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  they  never  divided  on  party  lines.  There  was  a 
Chief,  appointed  by  the  Commissioners,  but  whom  they 
could  not  remove  without  a  regular  trial  subject  to  review 
by  the  courts  of  law.  This  Chief  and  any  one  Commissioner 
had  power  to  hold  up  most  of  the  acts  of  the  other  three 
Commissioners.  It  was  made  easy  for  the  four  Commis 
sioners  to  come  to  a  deadlock  among  themselves ;  and  if  this 
danger  was  avoided,  it  was  easy  for  one  Commissioner,  by 
intriguing  with  the  Chief,  to  bring  the  other  three  to  a  stand 
still.  The  Commissioners  were  appointed  by  the  Mayor,  but 
he  could  not  remove  them  without  the  assent  of  the  Gov 
ernor,  who  was  usually  politically  opposed  to  him.  In  the 
same  way  the  Commissioners  could  appoint  the  patrolmen, 
but  they  could  not  remove  them,  save  after  a  trial  which 
went  up  for  review  to  the  courts. 

As  was  inevitable  under  our  system  of  law  procedure, 
this  meant  that  the  action  of  the  court  was  apt  to  be  deter 
mined  by  legal  technicalities^  It  was  possible  to  dismiss  a 


172    THEOnOKET   tfOOSKVTEJr/i— AJY  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

man  from  the  service  for  quite  insufficient  reasons,  and  to 
provide  against  the  reversal  of  the  sentence,  if  the  technical 
ities  of  procedure  were  observed.  But  the  worst  criminals 
were  apt  to  be  adroit  men,  against  whom  it  was  impossible 
to  get  legal  evidence  which  a  court  could  properly  con 
sider  in  a  criminal  trial  (and  the  mood  of  the  court  might  be 
to  treat  the  case  as  if  it  were  a  criminal  trial),  although  it 
was  easy  to  get  evidence  which  would  render  it  not  merely 
justifiable  but  necessary  for  a  man  to  remove  them  from  his 
private  employ — and  surely  the  public  should  be  as  well 
treated  as  a  private  employer.  Accordingly,  most  of  the 
worst  men  put  out  were  reinstated  by  the  courts ;  and  when 
the  Mayor  attempted  to  remove  one  of  my  colleagues  who 
made  it  his  business  to  try  to  nullify  the  work  done  by  the 
rest  of  us,  the  Governor  sided  with  the  recalcitrant  Com 
missioner  and  refused  to  permit  his  removal. 

Nevertheless,  an  astounding  quantity  of  work  was  done 
in  reforming  the  force.  We  had  a  good  deal  of  power, 
anyhow;  we  exercised  it  to  the  full;  and  we  accomplished 
some  things  by  assuming*  the  appearance  of  a  power  which 
we  did  not  really  possess. 

The  first  fight  I  made  was  to  keep  politics  absolutely 
out  of  the  force;  and  not  only  politics,  but  every  kind  of 
improper  favoritism.  Doubtless  in  making  thousands  of 
appointments  and  hundreds  of  promotions  there  were  men 
who  contrived  to  use  influence  of  which  I  was  ignorant. 
But  these  cases  must  have  been  few  and  far  between.  As 
far  as  was  humanly  possible,  the  appointments  and  promo 
tions  were  made  without  regard  to  any  question  except  the 
fitness  of  the  man  and  the  needs  of  the  service.  As  Civil 
Service  Commissioner  I  had  been  instructing  heads  of  de 
partments  and  bureaus  how  to  get  men  appointed  without 
regard  to  politics,  and  assuring  them  that  by  following  our 
methods  they  would  obtain  first-class  results.  As  Police 
Commissioner  I  was  able  practically  to  apply  my  own 
teachings. 

The  appointments  to  the  police  force  were  made  as  I  have 
described  in  the  last  chapter.  We  paid  not  the  slightest 


THE    NEW   YORK   POLICE  173 

attention  to  a  man's  politics  or  creed,  or  where  he  was  born, 
so  long  as  he  was  an  American  citizen ;  and  on  an  average 
we  obtained  far  and  away  the  best  men  that  had  ever  come 
into  the  Police  Department.  It  was  of  course  very  difficult 
at  first  to  convince  both  the  politicians  and  the  people  that 
we  really  meant  what  we  said,  and  that  every  one  really 
would  have  a  fair  trial.  There  had  been  in  previous  years 
the  most  widespread  and  gross  corruption  in  connection 
with  every  activity  in  the  Police  Department,  and  there 
had  been  a  regular  tariff  for  appointments  and  promotions. 
Many  powerful  politicians  and  many  corrupt  outsiders 
believed  that  in  some  way  or  other  it  would  still  be  possible 
to  secure  appointments  by  corrupt  and  improper  methods, 
and  many  good  citizens  felt  the  same  conviction.  I  endeav 
ored  to  remove  the  impression  from  the  minds  of  both  sets 
of  people  by  giving  the  widest  publicity  to  what  wre  were 
doing  and  how  we  were  doing  it,  by  making  the  whole  proc 
ess  open  and  aboveboard,  and  by  making  it  evident  that  we 
would  probe  to  the  bottom  every  charge  of  corruption. 

For  instance,  I  received  visits  at  one  time  from  a  Catholic 
priest,  and  at  another  time  from  a  Methodist  clergyman, 
who  had  parishioners  who  wished  to  enter  the  police  force, 
but  who  did  not  believe  they  could  get  in  save  by  the  pay 
ment  of  money  or  through  political  pressure.  The  priest 
was  running  a  temperance  lyceum  in  connection  with  his 
church,  and  he  wished  to  know  if  there  would  be  a  chance 
for  some  of  the  young  men  who  belonged  to  that  lyceum. 
The  Methodist  clergyman  came  from  a  little  patch  of  old 
native  America  which  by  a  recent  extension  had  been  taken 
within  the  limits  of  the  huge,  polyglot,  pleasure-loving  city. 
His  was  a  small  church,  most  of  the  members  being  ship 
wrights,  mechanics,  and  sailormen  from  the  local  coasters. 
In  each  case  I  assured  my  visitor  that  we  wanted  on  the 
force  men  of  the  exact  type  which  he  said  he  could  furnish. 
I  also  told  him  that  I  was  as  anxious  as  he  was  to  find  out  if 
there  was  any  improper  work  being  done  in  connection  with 
the  examinations,  and  that  I  would  like  him  to  get  four  or 
five  of  his  men  to  take  the  examinations  without  letting  me 


174    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

'      >••  •-  \:i'- '.',    - 

know  their  names.  Then,  whether  the  men  failed  or  suc 
ceeded,  he  and  I  would  take  their  papers  and  follow  them 
through  every  stage  so  that  we  could  tell  at  once  whether 
they  had  been  either  improperly  favored  or  improperly  dis 
criminated  against.  This  was  accordingly  done,  and  in 
each  case  my  visitor  turned  up  a  few  weeks  later,  his  face 
wreathed  in  smiles,  to  say  that  his  candidates  had  passed 
and  that  everything  was  evidently  all  straight.  During  my 
two  years  as  President  of  the  Commission  I  think  I  ap 
pointed  a  dozen  or  fifteen  members  of  that  little  Methodist 
congregation,  and  certainly  twice  that  number  of  men  from 
the  temperance  lyceum  of  the  Catholic  church  in  question. 
They  were  all  men  of  the  very  type  I  most  wished  to  see  on 
the  force — men  of  strong  physique  and  resolute  temper, 
sober,  self-respecting,  self-reliant,  with  a  strong  wish  to 
improve  themselves. 

Occasionally  I  would  myself  pick  out  a  man  and  tell  him 
to  take  the  examination.  Thus  one  evening  I  went  down  to 
speak  in  the  Bowery  at  the  Young  Men's  Institute,  a  branch 
of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association,  at  the  request  of 
Mr.  Cleveland  H.  Dodge.  While  there  he  told  me  he  wished 
to  show  me  a  young  Jew  who  had  recently,  by  an  exhibition 
of  marked  pluck  and  bodily  prowess,  saved  some  women  and 
children  from  a  burning  building.  The  young  Jew,  whose 
name  was  Otto  Eaphael,  was  brought  up  to  see  me ;  a  power 
ful  fellow,  with  good-humored,  intelligent  face.  I  asked  him 
about  his  education,  and  told  him  to  try  the  examination. 
He  did,  passed,  was  appointed,  and  made  an  admirable  offi 
cer;  and  he  and  all  his  family,  wherever  they  may  dwell, 
have  been  close  friends  of  mine  ever  since.  Otto  Eaphael 
was  a  genuine  East  Sider.  He  and  I  were  both  "straight 
New  York,"  to  use  the  vernacular  of  our  native  city.  To 
show  our  community  of  feeling  and  our  grasp  of  the  facts 
of  life,  I  may  mention  that  we  were  almost  the  only  men  in 
the  Police  Department  who  picked  Fitzsimmons  as  a  winner 
against  Corbett.  Otto's  parents  had  come  over  from  Bus- 
sia,  and  not  only  in  social  standing  but  in  pay  a  policeman's 
position  meant  everything  to  him.  It  enabled  Otto  to  edu- 


THE   NEW   YORK   POLICE  175 

cate  his  little  brothers  and  sisters  who  had  been  born  in 
this  country,  and  to  bring  over  from  Russia  two  or  three 
kinsfolk  who  had  perforce  been  left  behind. 

Eather  curiously,  it  was  by  no  means  as  easy  to  keep 
politics  and  corruption  out  of  the  promotions  as  out  of  the 
entrance  examinations.  This  was  because  I  could  take 
complete  charge  of  the  entrance  examinations  myself ;  and, 
moreover,  they  were  largely  automatic.  In  promotions,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  prime  element  was  the  record  and  ca 
pacity  of  the  officer,  and  for  this  we  had  largely  to  rely  upon 
the  judgment  of  the  man's  immediate  superiors.  This 
doubtless  meant  that  in  certain  cases  that  judgment  was 
given  for  improper  reasons. 

However,  there  were  cases  where  I  could  act  on  personal 
knowledge.  One  thing  that  we  did  was  to  endeavor  to  recog 
nize  gallantry.  We  did  not  have  to  work  a  revolution  in 
the  force  as  to  courage  in  the  way  that  we  had  to  work  a 
revolution  in  honesty.  They  had  always  been  brave  in 
dealing  with  riotous  and  violent  criminals.  But  they  had 
gradually  become  very  corrupt.  Our  great  work,  therefore, 
was  the  stamping  out  of  dishonesty,  and  this  work  we  did 
thoroughly,  so  far  as  the  ridiculous  bi-partisan  law  under 
which  the  Department  was  administered  would  permit.  But 
we  were  anxious  that,  while  stamping  out  what  was  evil  in 
the  force,  we  should  keep  and  improve  what  was  good. 
While  warring  on  dishonesty,  we  made  every  effort  to 
increase  efficiency.  It  has  unfortunately  been  shown  by  sad 
experience  that  at  times  a  police  organization  which  is  free 
from  the  taint  of  corruption  may  yet  show  itself  weak  in 
some  great  crisis  or  unable  to  deal  with  the  more  dangerous 
kinds  of  criminals.  This  we  were  determined  to  prevent. 

Our  efforts  were  crowned  with  entire  success.  The 
improvement  in  the  efficiency  of  the  force  went  hand  in 
hand  with  the  improvement  in  its  honesty.  The  men  in 
uniform  and  the  men  in  plain  clothes — the  detectives — 
did  better  work  than  ever  before.  The  aggregate  of  crimes 
where  punishment  followed  the  commission  of  the  crime  in 
creased,  while  the  aggregate  of  crimes  where  the  criminal 


176    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

escaped  punishment  decreased.  Every  discredited  poli 
tician,  every  sensational  newspaper,  and  every  timid  fool 
who  could  be  scared  by  clamor  was  against  us.  All  three 
classes  strove  by  every  means  in  their  power  to  show  that 
in  making  the  force  honest  we  had  impaired  its  efficiency; 
and  by  their  utterances  they  tended  to  bring  about  the  very 
condition  of  things  against  which  they  professed  to  protest. 
But  we  went  steadily  along  the  path  we  had  marked  out. 
The  fight  was  hard,  and  there  was  plenty  of  worry  and 
anxiety,  but  we  won.  I  was  appointed  in  May,  1895.  In 
February,  1897,  three  months  before  I  resigned  to  become 
Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  the  Judge  who  charged 
the  Grand  Jury  of  New  York  County  was  able  to  congratu 
late  them  on  the  phenomenal  decrease  in  crime,  especially  of 
the  violent  sort.  This  decrease  was  steady  during  the  two 
years.  The  police,  after  the  reform  policy  was  thoroughly 
tried,  proved  more  successful  than  ever  before  in  protecting 
life  and  property,  in  putting  down  crime  and  criminal  vice. 

The  part  played  by  the  recognition  and  reward  of  actual 
personal  prowess  among  the  members  of  the  police  force  in 
producing  this  state  of  affairs  was  appreciable,  though 
there  were  many  other  factors  that  combined  to  bring  about 
the  betterment.  The  immense  improvement  in  discipline 
by  punishing  all  offenders  without  mercy,  no  matter  how 
great  their  political  or  personal  influence ;  the  resolute  war 
fare  against  every  kind  of  criminal  who  had  hitherto  been 
able  corruptly  to  purchase  protection ;  the  prompt  recogni 
tion  of  ability  even  where  it  was  entirely  unconnected  with 
personal  prowess — all  these  were  elements  which  had  enor 
mous  weight  in  producing  the  change.  Mere  courage  and 
daring,  and  the  rewarding  of  courage  and  daring,  cannot 
supply  the  lack  of  discipline,  of  ability,  of  honesty.  But 
they  are  of  vital  consequence,  nevertheless.  No  police  force 
is  worth  anything  if  its  members  are  not  intelligent  and 
honest ;  but  neither  is  it  worth  anything  unless  its  members 
are  brave,  hardy,  and  well  disciplined. 

"We  showed  recognition  of  daring  and  of  personal  prowess 
in  two  ways :  first,  by  awarding  a  medal  or  a  certificate  in 


THE    NEW    YORK   POLICE  177 

remembrance  of  the  deed ;  and,  second,  by  giving  it  weight 
in  making  any  promotion,  especially  to  the  lower  grades. 
In  the  higher  grades — in  all  promotions  above  that  of  ser 
geant,  for  instance — resolute  and  daring  courage  cannot 
normally  be  considered  as  a  factor  of  determining  weight 
in  making  promotions;  rather  is  it  a  quality  the  lack  of 
which  unfits  a  man  for  promotion.  For  in  the  higher  places 
we  must  assume  the  existence  of  such  a  quality  in  any  fit 
candidate,  and  must  make  the  promotion  with  a  view  to  the 
man's  energy,  executive  capacity,  and  power  of  command. 
In  the  lower  grades,  however,  marked  gallantry  should  al 
ways  be  taken  into  account  in  deciding  among  different 
candidates  for  any  given  place. 

During  our  two  years'  service  we  found  it  necessary  over 
a  hundred  times  to  single  out  men  for  special  mention  be 
cause  of  some  feat  of  heroism.  The  heroism  usually  took 
one  of  four  forms :  saving  somebody  from  drowning,  saving 
somebody  from  a  burning  building,  stopping  a  runaway 
team,  or  arresting  some  violent  lawbreaker  under  excep 
tional  circumstances.  To  illustrate  our  method  of  action,  I 
will  take  two  of  the  first  promotions  made  after  I  became 
Commissioner.  One  case  was  that  of  an  old  fellow,  a  vet 
eran  of  the  Civil  War,  who  was  at  the  time  a  roundsman.  I 
happened  to  notice  one  day  that  he  had  saved  a  woman  from 
drowning,  and  had  him  summoned  so  that  I  might  look  into 
the  matter.  The  old  fellow  brought  up  his  record  before 
me,  and  showed  not  a  little  nervousness  and  agitation;  for 
it  appeared  that  he  had  grown  gray  in  the  service,  had  per 
formed  feat  after  feat  of  heroism,  but  had  no  political  back 
ing  of  any  account.  No  heed  had  ever  been  paid  him.  He 
was  one  of  the  quiet  men  who  attend  solely  to  duty,  and 
although  a  Grand  Army  man,  he  had  never  sought  to  use 
influence  of  any  kind.  Now,  at  last,  he  thought  there  was 
a  chance  for  him.  He  had  been  twenty-two  years  on  the 
force,  and  during  that  time  had  saved  some  twenty-five  per 
sons  from  death  by  drowning,  varying  the  performance  two 
or  three  times  by  saving  persons  from  burning  buildings. 
Twice  Congress  had  passed  laws  especially  to  empower  the 


178    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

then  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  John  Sherman,  to  give  him 
a  medal  for  distinguished  gallantry  in  saving  life.  The 
Life-Saving  Society  had  also  given  him  its  medal,  and  so 
had  the  Police  Department.  There  was  not  a  complaint  in 
all  his  record  against  him  for  any  infraction  of  duty,  and 
he  was  sober  and  trustworthy.  He  was  entitled  to  his  pro 
motion  ;  and-  he  got  it,  there  and  then.  It  may  be  worth 
mentioning  that  he  kept  on  saving  life  after  he  was  given  his 
sergeantcy.  On  October  21,  1896,  he  again  rescued  a  man 
from  drowning.  It  was  at  night,  nobody  else  was  in  the 
neighborhood,  and  the  dock  from  which  he  jumped  was  in 
absolute  darkness,  and  he  was  ten  minutes  in  the  water, 
which  was  very  cold.  He  was  fifty-five  years  old  when  he 
saved  this  man.  It  was  the  twenty-ninth  person  whose  life 
he  had  saved  during  his  twenty-three  years'  service  in  the 
Department. 

The  other  man  was  a  patrolman  whom  we  promoted  to 
roundsman  for  activity  in  catching  a  burglar  under  rather 
peculiar  circumstances.  I  happened  to  note  his  getting  a 
burglar  one  week.  Apparently  he  had  fallen  into  the  habit, 
for  he  got  another  next  week.  In  the  latter  case  the  burglar 
escaped  from  the  house  soon  after  midnight,  and  ran  away 
toward  Park  Avenue,  with  the  policeman  in  hot  chase. 
The  New  York  Central  Eailroad  runs  under  Park  Avenue, 
and  there  is  a  succession  of  openings  in  the  top  of  the  tun 
nel.  Finding  that  the  policeman  was  gaining  on  him,  the 
burglar  took  a  desperate  chance  and  leaped  down  one  of 
these  openings,  at  the  risk  of  breaking  his  neck.  Now  the 
burglar  was  running  for  his  liberty,  and  it  was  the  part  of 
wisdom  for  him  to  imperil  life  or  limb;  but  the  policeman 
was  merely  doing  his  duty,  and  nobody  could  have  blamed 
him  for  not  taking  the  jump.  However,  he  jumped ;  and  in 
this  particular  case  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  heavy  upon 
the  unrighteous.  The  burglar  had  the  breath  knocked  out 
of  him,  and  the  "cop"  didn't.  When  his  victim  could  walk, 
the  officer  trotted  him  around  to  the  station-house;  and  a 
week  after  I  had  the  officer  up  and  promoted  him,  for  he  was 
sober,  trustworthy,  and  strictly  attentive  to  duty. 


THE   NEW  YORK  POLICE  179 

Now  I  think  that  any  decent  man  of  reasonable  intelli 
gence  will  agree  that  we  were  quite  right  in  promoting  men 
in  cases  like  these,  and  quite  right  in  excluding  politics  from 
promotions.  Yet  it  was  because  of  our  consistently  acting 
in  this  manner,  resolutely  warring  on  dishonesty  and  on  that 
peculiar  form  of  baseness  which  masquerades  as  "practi 
cal"  politics,  and  steadily  refusing  to  pay  heed  to  any  con 
sideration  except  the  good  of  the  service  and  the  city,  and 
the  merits  of  the  men  themselves,  that  we  drew  down  upon 
our  heads  the  bitter  and  malignant  animosity  of  the  bread- 
and-butter  spoils  politicians.  They  secured  the  repeal  of 
the  Civil  Service  Law  by  the  State  Legislature.  They 
attempted  and  almost  succeeded  in  the  effort  to  legislate 
us  out  of  office.  They  joined  with  the  baser  portion  of  the 
sensational  press  in  every  species  of  foul,  indecent  false 
hood  and  slander  as  to  what  we  were  doing.  They  at 
tempted  to  seduce  or  frighten  us  by  every  species  of  in 
trigue  and  cajolery,  of  promise  of  political  reward  and 
threat  of  political  punishment.  They  failed  in  their  pur 
pose.  I  believe  in  political  organizations,  and  I  believe  in 
practical  politics.  If  a  man  is  not  practical,  he  is  of  no  use 
anywhere.  But  when  politicians  treat  practical  politics  as 
foul  politics,  and  when  they  turn  what  ought  to  be  a  neces 
sary  and  useful  political  organization  into  a  machine  run 
by  professional  spoilsmen  of  low  morality  in  their  own  in 
terest,  then  it  is  time  to  drive  the  politician  from  public  life, 
and  either  to  mend  or  destroy  the  machine,  according  as  the 
necessity  may  determine. 

We  promoted  to  roundsman  a  patrolman,  with  an  already 
excellent  record,  for  gallantry  shown  in  a  fray  which  re 
sulted  in  the  death  of  his  antagonist.  He  was  after  a  gang 
of  toughs  who  had  just  waylaid,  robbed,  and  beaten  a  man. 
They  scattered  and  he  pursued  the  ringleader.  Eunning 
hard,  he  gained  on  his  man,  whereupon  the  latter  suddenly 
turned  and  fired  full  in  his  face.  The  officer  already  had  his 
revolver  drawn,  and  the  two  shots  rang  out  almost  together. 
The  policeman  was  within  a  fraction  of  death,  for  the  bullet 
from  his  opponent's  pistol  went  through  his  helmet  and 


180    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

just  broke  the  skin  of  his  head.  His  own  aim  was  truer, 
and  the  man  he  was  after  fell  dead,  shot  through  the  heart. 
I  may  explain  that  I  have  not  the  slightest  sympathy  with 
any  policy  which  tends  to  put  the  policeman  at  the  mercy  of 
a  tough,  or  which  deprives  him  of  efficient  weapons.  While 
Police  Commissioner  we  punished  any  brutality  by  the 
police  with  such  immediate  severity  that  all  cases  of  brutal 
ity  practically  came  to  an  end.  No  decent  citizen  had  any 
thing  to  fear  from  the  police  during  the  two  years  of  my 
service.  But  we  consistently  encouraged  the  police  to  prove 
that  the  violent  criminal  who  endeavored  to  molest  them  or 
to  resist  arrest,  or  to  interfere  with  them  in  the  discharge 
of  their  duty,  was  himself  in  grave  jeopardy;  and  we  had 
every  "gang"  broken  up  and  the  members  punished  with 
whatever  severity  was  necessary.  Of  course  where  possible 
the  officer  merely  crippled  the  criminal  who  was  violent. 

One  of  the  things  that  we  did  while  in  office  was  to  train 
the  men  in  the  use  of  the  pistol.  A  school  of  pistol  practice 
was  established,  and  the  marksmanship  of  the  force  was 
wonderfully  improved.  The  man  in  charge  of  the  school 
was  a  roundsman,  Petty,  whom  we  promoted  to  sergeant. 
He  was  one  of  the  champion  revolver  shots  of  the  country, 
and  could  hit  just  about  where  he  aimed.  Twice  he  was 
forced  to  fire  at  criminals  who  resisted  arrest,  and  in  each 
case  he  hit  his  man  in  the  arm  or  leg,  simply  stopping  him 
without  danger  to  his  life. 

In  May,  1896,  a  number  of  burglaries  occurred  far  up 
town,  in  the  neighborhood  of  One  Hundred  and  Fifty-sixth 
Street  and  Union  Avenue.  Two  officers  were  sent  out  each 
night  to  patrol  the  streets  in  plain  clothes.  About  two 
o'clock  on  the  morning  of  May  8  they  caught  a  glimpse  of 
two  men  loitering  about  a  large  corner  house,  and  de 
termined  to  make  them  explain  their  actions.  In  order  to 
cut  off  their  escape,  one  officer  went  down  one  street  and  one 
the  other.  The  first  officer,  whose  name  was  Eyan,  found 
the  two  men  at  the  gateway  of  the  side  entrance  of  the 
house,  and  hailed  to  know  what  they  were  doing.  Without 
answering,  they  turned  and  ran  toward  Prospect  Avenue, 


THE    NEW   YORK   POLICE  181 

with  Ryan  in  close  pursuit.  After  running  about  one  hun 
dred  feet,  one  of  them  turned  and  fired  three  shots  at  Ryan, 
but  failed  to  hit  him.  The  two  then  separated,  and  the  man 
who  had  done  the  shooting  escaped.  The  other  man,  whose 
name  proved  to  be  O'Connor,  again  took  to  his  heels,  with 
Ryan  still  after  him;  they  turned  the  corner  and  met  the 
other  officer,  whose  name  was  Reid,  running  as  hard  as  he 
could  toward  the  shooting.  When  O'Connor  saw  himself 
cut  off  by  Reid,  he  fired  at  his  new  foe,  the  bullet  cutting 
Reid's  overcoat  on  the  left  shoulder.  Reid  promptly  fired 
in  return,  his  bullet  going  into  0  'Connor 's  neck  and  causing 
him  to  turn  a  complete  somersault.  The  two  officers  then 
cared  for  their  prisoner  until  the  ambulance  arrived,  when 
he  was  taken  to  the  hospital  and  pronounced  mortally 
wounded.  His  companion  was  afterward  caught,  and  they 
turned  out  to  be  the  very  burglars  for  whom  Reid  and 
Ryan  had  been  on  the  lookout. 

In  December,  1896,  one  of  our  officers  was  shot.  A  row 
occurred  in  a  restaurant,  which  ended  in  two  young  toughs 
drawing  their  revolvers  and  literally  running  amuck,  shoot 
ing  two  or  three  men.  A  policeman,  attracted  by  the  noise, 
ran  up  and  seized  one  of  them,  whereupon  the  other  shot 
him  in  the  mouth,  wounding  him  badly.  Nevertheless,  the 
officer  kept  his  prisoner  and  carried  him  to  the  station- 
house.  The  tough  who  had  done  the  shooting  ran  out  and 
was  seized  by  another  officer.  The  tough  fired  at  him,  the 
bullet  passing  through  the  officer's  overcoat,  but  he  was 
promptly  knocked  down,  disarmed,  and  brought  to  the 
station-house.  In  this  case  neither  policeman  used  his 
revolver,  and  each  brought  in  his  man,  although  the  latter 
was  armed  and  resisted  arrest,  one  of  the  officers  taking  in 
his  prisoner  after  having  been  himself  severely  wounded. 
A  lamentable  feature  of  the  case  was  that  this  same  officer 
was  a  man  who,  though  capable  of  great  gallantry,  was  also 
given  to  shirking  his  work,  and  we  were  finally  obliged  to 
dismiss  him  from  the  force,  after  passing  over  two  or  three 
glaring  misdeeds  in  view  of  his  record  for  courage. 

We  promoted  another  man  on  account  of  finding  out 


182    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

accidentally  that  he  had  performed  a  notable  feat,  which  he 
had  forborne  even  to  mention,  so  that  his  name  never  came 
on  the  roll  of  honor.  Late  at  night,  while  patrolling  a  lonely 
part  of  his  post,  he  came  upon  three  young  toughs  who  had 
turned  highwaymen  and  were  robbing  a  peddler.  He  ran 
in  at  once  with  his  night-stick,  whereupon  the  toughs  showed 
fight,  and  one  of  them  struck  at  him  with  a  bludgeon,  break 
ing  his  left  hand.  The  officer,  however,  made  such  good  use 
of  his  night-stick  that  he  knocked  down  two  of  his  assail 
ants,  whereupon  the  third  ran  away,  and  he  brought  both 
of  his  prisoners  to  the  station-house.  Then  he  went  round 
to  the  hospital,  had  his  broken  hand  set  in  plaster,  and  actu 
ally  reported  for  duty  at  the  next  tour,  without  losing  one 
hour.  He  was  a  quiet  fellow,  with  a  record  free  from  com 
plaints,  and  we  made  him  roundsman. 

The  mounted  squad  have,  of  course,  many  opportunities 
to  distinguish  themselves  in  stopping  runaways.  In  May, 
1895,  a  mounted  policeman  named  Heyer  succeeded  in  stop 
ping  a  runaway  at  Kingsbridge  under  rather  noteworthy 
circumstances.  Two  men  were  driving  in  a  buggy,  when 
the  horse  stumbled,  and  in  recovering  himself  broke  the 
head-stall,  so  that  the  bridle  fell  off.  The  horse  was  a 
spirited  trotter,  and  at  once  ran  away  at  full  speed.  Heyer 
saw  the  occurrence,  and  followed  at  a  run.  When  he  got 
alongside  the  runaway  he  seized  him  by  the  forelock,  guided 
him  dexterously  over  the  bridge,  preventing  him  from  run 
ning  into  the  numerous  wagons  that  were  on  the  road,  and 
finally  forced  him  up  a  hill  and  into  a  wagon- shed.  Three 
months  later  this  same  officer  saved  a  man  from  drowning. 

The  members  of  the  bicycle  squad,  which  was  established 
shortly  after  we  took  office,  soon  grew  to  show  not  only 
extraordinary  proficiency  on  the  wheel,  but  extraordinary 
daring.  They  frequently  stopped  runaways,  wheeling  along 
side  of  them,  and  grasping  the  horses  while  going  at  full 
speed;  and,  what  was  even  more  remarkable,  they  man 
aged  not  only  to  overtake  but  to  jump  into  the  vehicle  and 
capture,  on  two  or  three  different  occasions,  men  who  were 
guilty  of  reckless  driving,  and  who  fought  violently  in  re- 


THE   NEW   YORK   POLICE  183 

sisting  arrest.  They  were  picked  men,  being  young  and 
active,  and  any  feat  of  daring  which  could  be  accomplished 
on  the  wheel  they  were  certain  to  accomplish. 

Three  of  the  best  riders  of  the  bicycle  sqnad,  whose  names 
and  records  happen  to  occur  to  me,  were  men  of  the  three 
ethnic  strains  most  strongly  represented  in  the  New  York 
police  force,  being  respectively  of  native  American,  Ger 
man,  and  Irish  parentage. 

The  German  was  a  man  of  enormous  power,  and  he  was 
able  to  stop  each  of  the  many  runaways  he  tackled  without 
losing  his  wheel.  Choosing  his  time,  he  would  get  along 
side  the  horse  and  seize  the  bit  in  his  left  hand,  keeping  his 
right  on  the  crossbar  of  the  wheel.  By  degrees  he  then  got 
the  animal  under  control.  He  never  failed  to  stop  it,  and 
he  never  lost  his  wheel.  He  also  never  failed  to  overtake 
any  "  scorcher, "  although  many  of  these  were  professional 
riders  who  deliberately  violated  the  law  to  see  if  they  could 
not  get  away  from  him ;  for  the  wheelmen  soon  get  to  know 
the  officers  whose  beats  they  cross. 

The  Yankee,  though  a  tall,  powerful  man  and  a  very  good 
rider,  scarcely  came  up  to  the  German  in  either  respect; 
he  possessed  exceptional  ability,  however,  as  well  as  excep 
tional  nerve  and  coolness,  and  he  also  won  his  promotion. 
He  stopped  about  as  many  runaways;  but  when  the  horse 
was  really  panic-stricken  he  usually  had  to  turn  his  wheel 
loose,  getting  a  firm  grip  on  the  horse 's  reins  and  then  kick 
ing  his  wheel  so  that  it  would  fall  out  of  the  way  of  injury 
from  the  wagon.  On  one  occasion  he  had  a  fight  with  a 
drunken  and  reckless  driver  who  was  urging  to  top  speed 
a  spirited  horse.  He  first  got  hold  of  the  horse,  whereupon 
the  driver  lashed  both  him  and  the  beast,  and  the  animal, 
already  mad  with  terror,  could  not  be  stopped.  The  officer 
had  of  course  kicked  away  his  wheel  at  the  beginning,  and 
after  being  dragged  along  for  some  distance  he  let  go  the 
beast  and  made  a  grab  at  the  wagon.  The  driver  hit  him 
with  his  whip,  but  he  managed  to  get  in,  and  after  a  vigor 
ous  tussle  overcame  his  man,  and  disposed  of  him  by  getting 
him  down  and  sitting  on  him.  This  left  his  hands  free  for 


184    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

the  reins.  By  degrees  he  got  the  horse  under  control,  and 
drove  the  wagon  round  to  the  station-house,  still  sitting  on 
his  victim.  "I  jounced  up  and  down  on  him  to  keep  him 
quiet  when  he  turned  ugly,"  he  remarked  to  me  parenthet 
ically.  Having  disposed  of  the  wagon,  he  took  the  man 
round  to  the  court,  and  on  the  way  the  prisoner  suddenly 
sprang  on  him  and  tried  to  throttle  him.  Convinced  at  last 
that  patience  had  ceased  to  be  a  virtue,  he  quieted  his 
assailant  with  a  smash  on  the  head  that  took  all  the  fight 
out  of  him  until  he  was  brought  before  the  judge  and  fined. 
Like  the  other  "bicycle  cops,"  this  officer  made  a  number 
of  arrests  of  criminals,  such  as  thieves,  highwaymen,  and 
the  like,  in  addition  to  his  natural  prey — scorchers,  runa 
ways,  and  reckless  drivers. 

The  third  member  of  the  trio,  a  tall,  sinewy  man  with 
flaming  red  hair,  which  rather  added  to  the  terror  he  in 
spired  in  evil-doers,  was  usually  stationed  in  a  tough  part 
of  the  city,  where  there  was  a  tendency  to  crimes  of  violence, 
and  incidentally  an  occasional  desire  to  harass  wheelmen. 
The  officer  was  as  good  off  his  wheel  as  on  it,  and  he  speed 
ily  established  perfect  order  on  his  beat,  being  always 
willing  to  "take  chances"  in  getting  his  man.  He  was  no 
respecter  of  persons,  and  when  it  became  his  duty  to  arrest 
a  wealthy  man  for  persistently  refusing  to  have  his  carriage 
lamps  lighted  after  nightfall,  he  brought  him  in  with  the 
same  indifference  that  he  displayed  in  arresting  a  street- 
corner  tough  who  had  thrown  a  brick  at  a  wheelman. 

Occasionally  a  policeman  would  perform  work  which  ordi 
narily  comes  within  the  domain  of  the  fireman.  In  No 
vember,  1896,  an  officer  who  had  previously  saved  a  man 
from  death  by  drowning  added  to  his  record  by  saving  five 
persons  from  burning.  He  was  at  the  time  asleep,  when  he 
was  aroused  by  a  fire  in  a  house  a  few  doors  away.  Eunning 
over  the  roofs  of  the  adjoining  houses  until  he  reached  the 
burning  building,  he  found  that  on  the  fourth  floor  the 
flames  had  cut  off  all  exit  from  an  apartment  in  which  there 
were  four  women,  two  of  them  over  fifty,  and  one  of  the 
others  with  a  six-months-old  baby.  The  officer  ran  down 


THE   NEW  YORK   POLICE  185 

to  the  adjoining  house,  broke  open  the  door  of  the  apart 
ment  on  the  same  floor — the  fourth — and  crept  out  on  the 
coping,  less  than  three  inches  wide,  that  ran  from  one  house 
to  the  other.  Being  a  large  and  very  powerful  and  active 
man,  he  managed  to  keep  hold  of  the  casing  of  the  window 
with  one  hand,  and  with  the  other  to  reach  to  the  window  of 
the  apartment  where  the  women  and  child  were.  The  fire 
men  appeared,  and  stretched  a  net  underneath.  The  crowd 
that  was  looking  on  suddenly  became  motionless  and  silent. 
Then,  one  by  one,  he  drew  the  women  out  of  their  window, 
and,  holding  them  tight  against  the  wall,  passed  them  into 
the  other  window.  The  exertion  in  such  an  attitude  was 
great,  and  he  strained  himself  badly;  but  he  possessed  a 
practical  mind,  and  as  soon  as  the  women  were  saved  he 
began  a  prompt  investigation  of  the  cause  of  the  fire,  and 
arrested  two  men  whose  carelessness,  as  was  afterward 
proved,  caused  it. 

Now  and  then  a  man,  though  a  brave  man,  proved  to  be 
slack  or  stupid  or  vicious,  and  we  could  make  nothing  out 
of  him;  but  hardihood  and  courage  were  qualities  upon 
which  we  insisted  and  which  we  rewarded.  Whenever  I 
see  the  police  force  attacked  and  vilified,  I  always  remember 
my  association  with  it.  The  cases  I  have  given  above  are 
merely  instances  chosen  almost  at  random  among  hundreds 
of  others.  Men  such  as  those  I  have  mentioned  have  the 
right  stuff  in  them !  If  they  go  wrong,  the  trouble  is  with 
the  system,  and  therefore  with  us,  the  citizens,  for  permit 
ting  the  system  to  go  unchanged.  The  conditions  of  New 
York  life  are  such  as  to  make  the  police  problem  therein 
more  difficult  than  in  any  other  of  the  world's  great  capi 
tals.  I  am  often  asked  if  policemen  are  honest.  I  believe 
that  the  great  majority  of  them  want  to  be  honest  and  will 
be  honest  whenever  they  are  given  the  chance.  The  New 
York  police  force  is  a  body  thoroughly  representative  of 
the  great  city  itself.  As  I  have  said  above,  the  predominant 
ethnic  strains  in  it  are,  first,  the  men  of  Irish  birth  or  par 
entage,  and,  following  these,  the  native  Americans,  usually 
from  the  country  districts,  and  the  men  of  German  birth 


186    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

or  parentage.  There  are  also  Jews,  Scandinavians,  Italians, 
Slavs,  and  men  of  other  nationalities.  All  soon  become 
welded  into  one  body.  They  are  physically  a  fine  lot.  More 
over,  their  instincts  are  right;  they  are  game,  they  are 
alert  and  self-reliant,  they  prefer  to  act  squarely  if  they  are 
allowed  so  to  act.  All  that  they  need  is  to  be  given  the 
chance  to  prove  themselves  honest,  brave,  and  self-respect 
ing. 

The  law  at  present  is  much  better  than  in  our  day,  so 
far  as  governing  the  force  is  concerned.  There  is  now  a 
single  Commissioner,  and  the  Mayor  has  complete  power 
over  him.  The  Mayor,  through  his  Commissioner,  now 
has  power  to  keep  the  police  force  on  a  good  level  of  con 
duct  if  with  resolution  and  common  sense  he  insists  on  ab 
solute  honesty  within  the  force  and  at  the  same  time  heart 
ily  supports  it  against  the  criminal  classes.  To  weaken  the 
force  in  its  dealings  with  gangs  and  toughs  and  criminals 
generally  is  as  damaging  as  to  permit  dishonesty,  and, 
moreover,  works  towards  dishonesty.  But  while  under  the 
present  law  very  much  improvement  can  be  worked,  there 
is  need  of  change  of  the  law  which  will  make  the  Police 
Commissioner  a  permanent,  non-partisan  official,  holding 
office  so  long  as  he  proves  thoroughly  fit  for  the  job,  com 
pletely  independent  of  the  politicians  and  privileged  inter 
ests,  and  with  complete  power  over  the  force.  This  means 
that  there  must  be  the  right  law,  and  the  right  public  opin 
ion  back  of  the  law. 

The  many-sided  ethnic  character  of  the  force  now  and 
then  gives  rise  to,  or  affords  opportunity  for,  queer  happen 
ings.  Occasionally  it  enables  one  to  meet  emergencies  in 
the  best  possible  fashion.  While  I  was  Police  Commis 
sioner  an  anti-Semitic  preacher  from  Berlin,  Eector  Ahl- 
wardt,  came  over  to  New  York  to  preach  a  crusade  against 
the  Jews.  Many  of  the  New  York  Jews  were  much  excited 
and  asked  me  to  prevent  him  from  speaking  and  not  to 
give  him  police  protection.  This,  I  told  them,  was  impos 
sible  ;  and  if  possible  would  have  been  undesirable  because 
it  would  have  made  him  a  martyr.  The  proper  thing  to 


THE   NEW  YORK  POLICE  187 

do  was  to  make  him  ridiculous.  Accordingly  I  detailed  for 
his  protection  a  Jew  sergeant  and  a  score  or  two  of  Jew  po 
licemen.  He  made  his  harangue  against  the  Jews  under 
the  active  protection  of  some  forty  policemen,  every  one  of 
them  a  Jew!  It  was  the  most  effective  possible  answer; 
and  incidentally  it  was  an  object-lesson  to  our  people,  whose 
greatest  need  it  is  to  learn  that  there  must  be  no  division 
by  class  hatred,  whether  this  hatred  be  that  of  creed  against 
creed,  nationality  against  nationality,  section  against  sec 
tion,  or  men  of  one  social  or  industrial  condition  against 
men  of  another  social  and  industrial  condition.  We  must 
ever  judge  each  individual  on  his  own  conduct  and  merits, 
and  not  on  his  membership  in  any  class,  whether  that  class 
be  based  on  theological,  social,  or  industrial  considerations. 

Among  my  political  opponents  when  I  was  Police  Com 
missioner  was  the  head  of  a  very  influential  local  Demo 
cratic  organization.  He  was  a  State  Senator  usually  known 
as  Big  Tim  Sullivan.  Big  Tim  represented  the  morals  of 
another  era;  that  is,  his  principles  and  actions  were  very 
much  those  of  a  Norman  noble  in  the  years  immediately  suc 
ceeding  the  Battle  of  Hastings.  (This  will  seem  flattery 
only  to  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with  the  real  histories 
and  antecedents  of  the  Norman  nobles  of  the  epoch  in  ques 
tion.)  His  application  of  these  eleventh-century  theories  to 
our  nineteenth-century  municipal  democratic  conditions 
brought  him  into  sharp  contact  with  me,  and  with  one  of  my 
right-hand  men  in  the  Department,  Inspector  John  McCul- 
lough.  Under  the  old  dispensation  this  would  have  meant 
that  his  friends  and  kinsfolk  were  under  the  ban. 

Now  it  happened  that  in  the  Department  at  that  time 
there  was  a  nephew  or  cousin  of  his,  Jerry  D.  Sullivan.  I 
found  that  Jerry  was  an  uncommonly  good  man,  a  con 
scientious,  capable  officer,  and  I  promoted  him.  I  do  not 
know  whether  Jerry  or  Jerry's  cousin  (Senator  Sullivan) 
was  more  astonished.  The  Senator  called  upon  me  to  ex 
press  what  I  am  sure  was  a  very  genuine  feeling  of  appre 
ciation.  Poor  Jerry  died,  I  think  of  consumption,  a  year  or 
two  after  I  left  the  Department.  He  was  promoted  again 


188    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

after  I  left,  and  he  then  showed  that  he  possessed  the  very 
rare  quality  of  gratitude,  for  he  sent  me  a  telegram  dated 
January  15,  1898,  running  as  follows:  "Was  made  ser 
geant  to-day.  I  thank  you  for  all  in  my  first  advancement." 
And  in  a  letter  written  to  me  he  said :  "In  the  future,  as  in 
the  past,  I  will  endeavor  at  all  times  to  perform  my  duty 
honestly  and  fearlessly,  and  never  cause  you  to  feel  that 
you  were  mistaken  in  me,  so  that  you  will  be  justly  proud  of 
my  record. "  The  Senator,  though  politically  opposed  to 
me,  always  kept  a  feeling  of  friendship  for  me  after  this  in 
cident.  He  served  in  Congress  while  I  was  President. 

The  police  can  be  used  to  help  all  kinds  of  good  purposes. 
When  I  was  Police  Commissioner  much  difficulty  had  been 
encountered  in  locating  illegal  and  fraudulent  practitioners 
of  medicine.  Dr.  Maurice  Lewi  called  on  me,  with  a  letter 
from  James  Eussell  Parsons,  the  Secretary  of  the  Board  of 
Eegents  at  Albany,  and  asked  me  if  I  could  not  help.  After 
questioning  him  I  found  that  the  local  authorities  were 
eager  to  prosecute  these  men,  but  could  not  locate  them ;  and 
I  made  up  my  mind  I  would  try  my  hand  at  it.  Accordingly, 
a  sealed  order  was  sent  to  the  commanding  officer  of  each 
police  precinct  in  New  York,  not  to  be  opened  until  just 
before  the  morning  roll  call,  previous  to  the  police  squad 
going  on  duty.  This  order  required  that,  immediately  upon 
reaching  post,  each  patrolman  should  go  over  his  beat  and 
enter  upon  a  sheet  of  paper,  provided  for  that  purpose,  the 
full  name  and  address  of  every  doctor  sign  there  appearing. 
Immediately  upon  securing  this  information,  the  patrolman 
was  instructed  to  return  the  sheet  to  the  officer  in  charge  of 
the  precinct.  The  latter  in  turn  was  instructed  to  collect  and 
place  in  one  large  envelope  and  to  return  to  Police  Head 
quarters  all  the  data  thus  received.  As  a  result  of  this  pro 
cedure,  within  two  hours  the  prosecuting  officials  of  the  city 
of  New  York  were  in  possession  of  the  name  and  address 
of  every  person  in  New  York  who  announced  himself  as  a 
physician ;  and  scores  of  pretended  physicians  were  brought 
to  book  or  driven  from  the  city. 

One  of  the  perennially  serious  and  difficult  problems, 


THE   NEW   YORK   POLICE  189 

and  one  of  the  chief  reasons  for  police  blackmail  and  cor 
ruption,  is  to  be  found  in  the  excise  situation  in  New  York. 
When  I  was  Police  Commissioner,  New  York  was  a  city 
with  twelve  or  fifteen  thousand  saloons,  with  a  State  law 
which  said  they  should  be  closed  on  Sundays,  and  with  a 
local  sentiment  which  put  a  premium  on  violating  the  law 
by  making  Sunday  the  most  profitable  day  in  the  week  to  the 
saloon-keeper  who  was  willing  to  take  chances.  It  was  this 
willingness  to  take  chances  that  furnished  to  the  corrupt 
politician  and  the  corrupt  police  officer  their  opportunities. 

There  was  in  New  York  City  a  strong  sentiment  in  favor 
of  honesty  in  politics;  there  was  also  a  strong  sentiment 
in  favor  of  opening  the  saloons  on  Sundays;  and,  finally, 
there  was  a  strong  sentiment  in  favor  of  keeping  the  saloons 
closed  on  Sunday.  Unfortunately,  many  of  the  men  who 
favored  honest  government  nevertheless  preferred  keeping 
the  saloons  open  to  having  honest  government;  and  many 
others  among  the  men  who  favored  honest  government  put 
it  second  to  keeping  the  saloons  closed.  Moreover,  among 
the  people  who  wished  the  law  obeyed  and  the  saloons  closed 
there  were  plenty  who  objected  strongly  to  every  step  nec 
essary  to  accomplish  the  result,  although  they  also  insisted 
that  the  result  should  be  accomplished. 

Meanwhile  the  politicians  found  an  incredible  profit  in 
using  the  law  as  a  club  to  keep  the  saloons  in  line ;  all  ex 
cept  the  biggest,  the  owners  of  which,  or  the  owners  of  the 
breweries  back  of  which,  sat  in  the  inner  councils  of  Tam 
many,  or  controlled  Tammany's  allies  in  the  Republican 
organization.  The  police  used  the  partial  and  spasmodic 
enforcement  of  the  law  as  a  means  of  collecting  blackmail. 
The  result  was  that  the  officers  of  the  law,  the  politicians, 
and  the  saloon-keepers  became  inextricably  tangled  in  a 
network  of  crime  and  connivance  at  crime.  The  most  pow 
erful  saloon-keepers  controlled  the  politicians  and  the  po 
lice,  while  the  latter  in  turn  terrorized  and  blackmailed  all 
the  other  saloon-keepers.  It  was  not  a  case  of  non-enforce 
ment  of  the  law.  The  law  was  very  actively  enforced,  but 
,  it  was  enforced  with  corrupt  discrimination. 


190    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

It  is  difficult  for  men  who  have  not  been  brought  into  con 
tact  with  that  side  of  political  life  which  deals  with  the 
underworld  to  understand  the  brazen  openness  with  which 
this  blackmailing  of  lawbreakers  was  carried  out.  A  further 
very  dark  fact  was  that  many  of  the  men  responsible  for 
putting  the  law  on  the  statute-books  in  order  to  please  one 
element  of  their  constituents,  also  connived  at  or  even  prof 
ited  by  the  corrupt  and  partial  non-enforcement  of  the  law 
in  order  to  please  another  set  of  their  constituents,  or  to 
secure  profit  for  themselves.  The  organ  of  the  liquor-sellers 
at  that  time  was  the  Wine  and  Spirit  Gazette.  The  editor 
of  this  paper  believed  in  selling  liquor  on  Sunday,  and  felt 
that  it  was  an  outrage  to  forbid  it.  But  he  also  felt  that 
corruption  and  blackmail  made  too  big  a  price  to  pay  for 
the  partial  non-enforcement  of  the  law.  He  made  in  his 
paper  a  statement,  the  correctness  of  which  was  never  ques 
tioned,  which  offers  a  startling  commentary  on  New  York 
politics  of  that  period.  In  this  statement  he  recited  the 
fact  that  the  system  of  blackmail  had  been  brought  to  such 
a  state  of  perfection,  and  had  become  so  oppressive  to  the 
liquor  dealers  themselves,  that  they  communicated  at 
length  on  the  subject  with  Governor  Hill  (the  State  Dem 
ocratic  boss)  and  then  with  Mr.  Croker  (the  city  Democratic 
boss).  Finally  the  matter  was  formally  taken  up  by  a  com 
mittee  of  the  Central  Association  of  Liquor  Dealers  in  an 
interview  they  held  with  Mr.  Martin,  my  Tammany  pred 
ecessor  as  President  of  the  police  force.  In  matter-of- 
course  way  the  editor's  statement  continues:  "An  agree 
ment  was  made  between  the  leaders  of  Tammany  Hall  and 
the  liquor  dealers  according  to  which  the  monthly  blackmail 
paid  to  the  force  should  be  discontinued  in  return  for  politi 
cal  support."  Not  only  did  the  big  bosses,  State  and  local, 
treat  this  agreement,  and  the  corruption  to  which  it  was 
due,  as  normal  and  proper,  but  they  never  even  took  the 
trouble  to  deny  what  had  been  done  when  it  was  made  pub 
lic.  Tammany  and  the  police,  however,  did  not  fully  live  up 
to  the  agreement;  and  much  discrimination  of  a  very  cor 
rupt  kind,  and  of  a  very  exasperating  kind  to  liquor-sellers 


THE   NEW  YORK  POLICE  191 

who  wished  to  be  honest,  continued  in  connection  with  the 
enforcing  of  the  law. 

In  short,  the  agreement  was  kept  only  with  those  who  had 
' '  pull. ' '  These  men  with  '  '  pull ' '  were  benefited  when  their 
rivals  were  bullied  and  blackmailed  by  the  police.  The 
police,  meanwhile,  who  had  bought  appointment  or  pro 
motion,  and  the  politicians  back  of  them,  extended  the  black 
mailing  to  include  about  everything  from  the  pushcart 
peddler  and  the  big  or  small  merchant  who  wished  to  use 
the  sidewalk  illegally  for  his  goods,  up  to  the  keepers  of 
the  brothel,  the  gambling-house,  and  the  policy-shop.  The 
total  blackmail  ran  into  millions  of  dollars.  New  York  was 
a  wide-open  town.  The  big  bosses  rolled  in  wealth,  and  the 
corrupt  policemen  who  ran  the  force  lost  all  sense  of 
decency  and  justice.  Nevertheless,  I  wish  to  insist  on  the 
fact  that  the  honest  men  on  the  patrol  posts,  "the  men  with 
the  night-sticks,"  remained  desirous  to  see  honesty  obtain, 
although  they  were  losing  courage  and  hope. 

This  was  the  situation  that  confronted  me  when  I  came 
to  Mulberry  Street.  The  saloon  was  the  chief  source  of 
mischief.  It  was  with  the  saloon  that  I  had  to  deal,  and 
there  was  only  one  way  to  deal  with  it.  That  was  to  enforce 
the  law.  The  howl  that  rose  was  deafening.  The  profes 
sional  politicians  raved.  The  yellow  press  surpassed  them 
selves  in  clamor  and  mendacity.  A  favorite  assertion  was 
that  I  was  enforcing  a  "blue"  law,  an  obsolete  law  that  had 
never  before  been  enforced.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  was  only 
enforcing  honestly  a  law  that  had  hitherto  been  enforced 
dishonestly.  There  was  very  little  increase  in  the  number 
of  arrests  made  for  violating  the  Sunday  law.  Indeed, 
there  were  weeks  when  the  number  of  arrests  went  down. 
The  only  difference  was  that  there  was  no  protected  class. 
Everybody  was  arrested  alike,  and  I  took  especial  pains  to 
see  that  there  was  no  discrimination,  and  that  the  big  men 
and  the  men  with  political  influence  were  treated  like  every 
one  else.  The  immediate  effect  was  wholly  good.  I  had 
been  told  that  it  was  not  possible  to  close  the  saloons  on 
Sunday  and  that  I  could  not  succeed.  However,  I  did  sue- 


192    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ceed.  The  warden  of  Bellevne  Hospital  reported,  two  or 
three  weeks  after  we  had  begun,  that  for  the  first  time  in 
its  existence  there  had  not  been  a  case  due  to  a  drunken 
brawl  in  the  hospital  all  Monday.  The  police  courts  gave 
the  same  testimony,  while  savings  banks  recorded  increased 
deposits  and  pawnshops  hard  times.  The  most  touching 
of  all  things  was  the  fact  that  we  received  letters,  literally 
by  the  hundred,  from  mothers  in  tenement-houses  who  had 
never  been  allowed  to  take  their  children  to  the  country  in 
the  wide-open  days,  and  who  now  found  their  husbands 
willing  to  take  them  and  their  families  for  an  outing  on 
Sunday.  Jake  Eiis  and  I  spent  one  Sunday  from  morning 
till  night  in  the  tenement  districts,  seeing  for  ourselves 
what  had  happened. 

During  the  two  years  that  we  were  in  office  things  never 
slipped  back  to  anything  like  what  they  had  been  before. 
But  we  did  not  succeed  in  keeping  them  quite  as  highly 
keyed  as  during  these  first  weeks.  As  regards  the  Sunday- 
closing  law,  this  was  partly  because  public  sentiment  was 
not  really  with  us.  The  people  who  had  demanded  honesty, 
but  who  did  not  like  to  pay  for  it  by  the  loss  of  illegal  pleas 
ure,  joined  the  openly  dishonest  in  attacking  us.  More 
over,  all  kinds  of  ways  of  evading  the  law  were  tried,  and 
some  of  them  were  successful.  The  statute,  for  instance, 
permitted  any  man  to  take  liquor  with  meals.  After  two 
or  three  months  a  magistrate  was  found  who  decided  judi 
cially  that  seventeen  beers  and  one  pretzel  made  a  meal — 
after  which  decision  joy  again  became  unconfined  in  at  least 
some  of  the  saloons,  and  the  yellow  press  gleefully  an 
nounced  that  my  "tyranny"  had  been  curbed.  But  my 
prime  object,  that  of  stopping  blackmail,  was  largely  at 
tained. 

AJ1  kinds  of  incidents  occurred  in  connection  with  this 
crusade.  One  of  them  introduced  me  to  a  friend  who  re 
mains  a  friend  yet.  His  name  was  Edward  J.  Bourke.  He 
was  one  of  the  men  who  entered  the  police  force  through 
our  examinations  shortly  after  I  took  office.  I  had  sum 
moned  twenty  or  thirty  of  the  successful  applicants  to  let 


THE   NEW   YORK   POLICE  193 

me  look  over  them;  and  as  I  walked  into  the  hall,  one  of 
them,  a  well-set-up  man,  called  out  sharply  to  the  others, 
"  Gangway, "  making  them  move  to  one  side.  I  found  he 
had  served  in  the  United  States  navy.  The  incident  was 
sufficient  to  make  me  keep  him  in  mind.  A  month  later  I 
was  notified  by  a  police  reporter,  a  very  good  fellow,  that 
Bourke  was  in  difficulties,  and  that  he  thought  I  had  better 
look  into  the  matter  myself,  as  Bourke  was  being  accused 
by  certain  very  influential  men  of  grave  misconduct  in  an 
arrest  he  had  made  the  night  before.  Accordingly,  I  took 
the  matter  up  personally.  I  found  that  on  the  new  patrol 
man  ?s  beat  the  preceding  night — a  new  beat — there  was  a 
big  saloon  run  by  a  man  of  great  influence  in  political  circles 
known  as  "King"  Calahan.  After  midnight  the  saloon  was 
still  running  in  full  blast,  and  Bourke,  stepping  inside,  told 
Calahan  to  close  up.  It  was  at  the  time  filled  with  "friends 
of  personal  liberty,"  as  Governor  Hill  used  at  that  time, 
in  moments  of  pathos,  to  term  everybody  who  regarded  as 
tyranny  any  restriction  on  the  sale  of  liquor.  Calahan 's 
saloon  had  never  before  in  its  history  been  closed,  and  to 
have  a  green  cop  tell  him  to  close  it  seemed  to  him  so  in 
credible  that  he  regarded  it  merely  as  a  bad  jest.  On  his 
next  round  Bourke  stepped  in  and  repeated  the  order.  Cala 
han  felt  that  the  jest  had  gone  too  far,  and  by  way  of  pro 
test  knocked  Bourke  down.  This  was  an  error  of  judgment 
on  his  part,  for  when  Bourke  arose  he  knocked  down  Cala 
han.  The  two  then  grappled  and  fell  on  the  floor,  while  the 
"friends  of  personal  liberty"  danced  around  the  fight  and 
endeavored  to  stamp  on  everything  they  thought  wasn't 
Calahan.  However,  Bourke,  though  pretty  roughly  handled, 
got  his  man  and  shut  the  saloon.  When  he  appeared  against 
the  lawbreaker  in  court  next  day,  he  found  the  court-room 
crowded  with  influential  Tammany  Hall  politicians,  backed 
by  one  or  two  Eepublican  leaders  of  the  same  type;  for 
Calahan  was  a  baron  of  the  underworld,  and  both  his  feudal 
superiors  and  hi^  feudal  inferiors  gathered  to  the  rescue. 
His  backers  in  court  included  a  Congressman  and  a  State 
Senator,  and  so  deep-rooted  was  the  police  belief  in  "pull" 


194    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

that  his  own  superiors  had  turned  against  Bourke  and  were 
preparing  to  sacrifice  him.  Just  at  this  time  I  acted  on  the 
information  given  me  by  my  newspaper  friend  by  starting 
in  person  for  the  court.  The  knowledge  that  I  knew  what 
was  going  on,  that  I  meant  what  I  said,  and  that  I  intended 
to  make  the  affair  personal,  was  all  that  was  necessary.  Be 
fore  I  reached  the  court  all  effort  to  defend  Calahan  had 
promptly  ceased,  and  Bourke  had  come  forth  triumphant. 
I  immediately  promoted  him  to  roundsman.  He  is  a  cap 
tain  now.  He  has  been  on  the  force  ever  since,  save  that 
when  the  Spanish  War  came  he  obtained  a  holiday  without 
pay  for  six  months  and  reentered  the  navy,  serving  as  gun 
captain  in  one  of  the  gunboats,  and  doing  his  work,  as  was 
to  be  expected,  in  first-rate  fashion,  especially  when  under 
fire. 

Let  me  again  say  that  when  men  tell  me  that  the  police 
are  irredeemably  bad  I  remember  scores  and  hundreds  of 
cases  like  this  of  Bourke,  like  the  case  I  have  already  men 
tioned  of  Raphael,  like  the  other  cases  I  have  given  above. 

It  is  useless  to  tell  me  that  these  men  are  bad.  They  are 
naturally  first-rate  men.  There  are  no  better  men  any 
where  than  the  men  of  the  New  York  police  force ;  and  when 
they  go  bad  it  is  because  the  system  is  wrong,  and  because 
they  are  not  given  the  chance  to  do  the  good  work  they  can 
do  and  would  rather  do.  I  never  coddled  these  men.  I  pun 
ished  them  severely  whenever  I  thought  their  conduct  re 
quired  it.  All  I  did  was  to  try  to  be  just ;  to  reward  them 
when  they  did  well;  in  short,  to  act  squarely  by  them.  I 
believe  that,  as  a  whole,  they  liked  me.  When,  in  1912,  I 
ran  for  President  on  the  Progressive  ticket,  I  received  a 
number  of  unsigned  letters  inclosing  sums  of  money  for  the 
campaign.  One  of  these  inclosed  twenty  dollars.  The 
writer,  who  did  not  give  his  name,  said  that  he  was  a  police 
man,  that  I  had  once  had  him  before  me  on  charges,  and  had 
fined  him  twenty  dollars;  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  had 
not  committed  the  offense  for  which  I  had  fined  him,  but 
that  the  evidence  was  such  that  he  did  not  wonder  that  I 
had  been  misled,  and  never  blamed  me  for  it,  because  I  had 


THE   NEW  YOBK  POLICE  195 

acted  squarely  and  had  given  honest  and  decent  men  a 
chance  in  the  Police  Department ;  and  that  now  he  inclosed 
a  twenty-dollar  bill,  the  amount  of  the  fine  inflicted  on  him 
so  many  years  before.  I  have  always  wished  I  knew  who 
the  man  was. 

The  disciplinary  courts  were  very  interesting.  But  it 
was  extraordinarily  difficult  to  get  at  the  facts  in  the  more 
complicated  cases — as  must  always  be  true  under  similar 
circumstances ;  for  ordinarily  it  is  necessary  to  back  up  the 
superior  officer  who  makes  the  charge,  and  yet  it  is  always 
possible  that  this  superior  officer  is  consciously  or  uncon 
sciously  biased  against  his  subordinate. 

In  the  courts  the  charges  were  sometimes  brought  by 
police  officers  and  sometimes  by  private  citizens.  In  the 
latter  case  we  would  get  queer  insights  into  twilight  phases 
of  New  York  life.  It  was  necessary  to  be  always  on  our 
guard.  Often  an  accusation  would  be  brought  against  the 
policeman  because  he  had  been  guilty  of  misconduct.  Much 
more  often  the  accusation  merely  meant  that  the  officer  had 
incurred  animosity  by  doing  his  duty.  I  remember  one 
amusing  case  where  the  officer  was  wholly  to  blame  but  had 
acted  in  entire  good  faith. 

One  of  the  favorite  and  most  demoralizing  forms  of 
gambling  in  New  York  was  policy-playing.  The  policy 
slips  consisted  of  papers  with  three  rows  of  figures  written 
on  them.  The  officer  in  question  was  a  huge  pithecoid  lout 
of  a  creature,  with  a  wooden  face  and  a  receding  forehead, 
and  his  accuser  whom  he  had  arrested  the  preceding  even 
ing  was  a  little  grig  of  a  red-headed  man,  obviously  re 
spectable,  and  almost  incoherent  with  rage.  The  anger  of 
the  little  red-headed  man  was  but  natural,  for  he  had  just 
come  out  from  a  night  in  the  station-house.  He  had  been 
arrested  late  in  the  evening  on  suspicion  that  he  was  a 
policy-player,  because  of  the  rows  of  figures  on  a  piece  of 
paper  which  he  had  held  in  his  hand,  and  because  at  the  time 
of  his  arrest  he  had  just  stepped  into  the  entrance  of  the 
hall  of  a  tenement-house  in  order  to  read  by  lamplight. 
The  paper  was  produced  in  evidence.  There  were  the  three 


196    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

rows  of  figures  all  right,  but,  as  the  accused  explained,  hop 
ping  up  and  down  with  rage  and  excitement,  they  were  all 
of  them  the  numbers  of  hymns.  He  was  the  superintendent 
of  a  small  Sunday-school.  He  had  written  down  the  hymns 
for  several  future  services,  one  under  the  other,  and  on  the 
way  home  was  stopping  to  look  at  them,  under  convenient 
lamp-posts,  and  finally  by  the  light  of  the  lamp  in  a  tene 
ment-house  hallway;  and  it  was  this  conduct  which  struck 
the  sagacious  man  in  uniform  as  "  suspicious. " 

One  of  the  saddest  features  of  police  work  is  dealing  with 
the  social  evil,  with  prostitutes  and  houses  of  ill  fame. 
In  so  far  as  the  law  gave  me  power,  I  always  treated  the  men 
taken  in  any  raid  on  these  houses  precisely  as  the  women 
were  treated.  My  experience  brought  me  to  the  very  strong 
conviction  that  there  ought  not  to  be  any  toleration  by  law 
of  the  vice.  I  do  not  know  of  any  method  which  will  put 
a  complete  stop  to  the  evil,  but  I  do  know  certain  things 
that  ought  to  be  done  to  minimize  it.  One  of  these  is 
treating  men  and  women  on  an  exact  equality  for  the  same 
act.  Another  is  the  establishment  of  night  courts  and  of 
special  commissions  to  deal  with  this  special  class  of  cases. 
Another  is  that  suggested  by  the  Rev.  Charles  Stelzle,  of  the 
Labor  Temple — to  publish  conspicuously  the  name  of  the 
owner  of  any  property  used  for  immoral  purposes,  after 
said  owner  had  been  notified  of  the  use  and  has  failed  to  pre 
vent  it.  Another  is  to  prosecute  the  keepers  and  backers  of 
brothels,  men  and  women,  as  relentlessly  and  punish  them 
as  severely  as  pickpockets  and  common  thieves.  They 
should  never  be  fined ;  they  should  be  imprisoned.  As  for 
the  girls,  the  very  young  ones  and  first  offenders  should  be 
put  in  the  charge  of  probation  officers  or  sent  to  reforma 
tories,  and  the  large  percentage  of  feeble-minded  girls  and 
of  incorrigible  girls  and  women  should  be  sent  to  institu 
tions  created  for  them.  We  would  thus  remove  from  this 
hideous  commerce  the  articles  of  commerce.  Moreover,  the 
Federal  Government  must  in  ever-increasing  measure  pro 
ceed  against  the  degraded  promoters  of  this  commercialism, 
for  their  activities  are  inter-State  and  the  Nation  can  often 


THE   NEW   YORK   POLICE  197 

deal  with  them  more  effectively  than  the  States ;  although, 
as  public  sentiment  becomes  aroused,  Nation,  State,  and 
municipality  will  all  cooperate  towards  the  same  end  of 
rooting  out  the  traffic.  But  the  prime  need  is  to  raise  the 
level  of  individual  morality;  and  moreover,  to  encourage 
early  marriages,  the  single  standard  of  sex-morality,  and  a 
strict  sense  of  reciprocal  conjugal  obligation.  The  women 
who  preach  late  marriages  are  by  just  so  much  making  it 
difficult  to  better  the  standard  of  chastity. 

As  regards  the  white  slave  traffic,  the  men  engaged  in  it, 
and  the  women  too,  are  far  worse  criminals  than  any  ordi 
nary  murderers  can  be.  For  them  there  is  need  of  such  a 
law  as  that  recently  adopted  in  England  through  the  efforts 
of  Arthur  Lee,  M.P.,  a  law  which  includes  whipping  for  the 
male  offenders.  There  are  brutes  so  low,  so  infamous,  so 
degraded  and  bestial  in  their  cruelty  and  brutality,  that 
the  only  way  to  get  at  them  is  through  their  skins.  Senti 
mentality  on  behalf  of  such  men  is  really  almost  as  un 
healthy  and  wicked  as  the  criminality  of  the  men  themselves. 
My  experience  is  that  there  should  be  no  toleration  of  any 
"tenderloin"  or  "red  light"  district,  and  that,  above  all, 
there  should  be  the  most  relentless  war  on  commercialized 
vice.  The  men  who  profit  and  make  their  living  by  the 
depravity  and  the  awful  misery  of  other  human  beings  stand 
far  below  any  ordinary  criminals,  and  no  measures  taken 
against  them  can  be  too  severe. 

As  for  the  wretched  girls  who  follow  the  dreadful  trade 
in  question,  a  good  deal  can  be  done  by  a  change  in  economic 
conditions.  This  ought  to  be  done.  "When  girls  are  paid 
wages  inadequate  to  keep  them  from  starvation,  or  to  per 
mit  them  to  live  decently,  a  certain  proportion  are  forced  by 
their  economic  misery  into  lives  of  vice.  The  employers 
and  all  others  responsible  for  these  conditions  stand  on  a 
moral  level  not  far  above  the  white  slavers  themselves.  But 
it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  either  the  correction  of  these 
economic  conditions  or  the  abolition  of  the  white  slave 
trade  will  wholly  correct  the  evil  or  will  even  reach  the 
major  part  of  it.  The  economic  factor  is  very  far  from 


198    THEODORE    EOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

being  the  chief  factor  in  inducing  girls  to  go  into  this  dread 
ful  life.  As  with  so  many  other  problems,  while  there  must 
be  governmental  action,  there  must  also  be  strengthening  of 
the  average  individual  character  in  order  to  achieve  the 
desired  end.  Even  where  economic  conditions  are  bad,  girls 
who  are  both  strong  and  pure  will  remain  unaffected  by 
temptations  to  which  girls  of  weak  character  or  lax  stand 
ards  readily  yield.  Any  man  who  knows  the  wide  variation 
in  the  proportions  of  the  different  races  and  nationalities 
engaged  in  prostitution  must  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it 
is  out  of  the  question  to  treat  economic  conditions  as  the 
sole  conditions  or  even  as  the  chief  conditions  that  deter 
mine  this  question.  There  are  certain  races — the  Irish  are 
honorably  conspicuous  among  them — which,  no  matter 
wrhat  the  economic  pressure,  furnish  relatively  few  inmates 
of  houses  of  ill  fame.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  differences 
are  due  to  permanent  race  characteristics ;  this  is  shown  by 
the  fact  that  the  best  settlement  houses  find  that  practically 
all  their  "long-term  graduates,"  so  to  speak,  all  the  girls 
that  come  for  a  long  period  under  their  influence,  no  matter 
what  their  race  or  national  origin,  remain  pure.  In  every 
race  there  are  some  naturally  vicious  individuals  and  some 
weak  individuals  who  readily  succumb  under  economic 
pressure.  A  girl  who  is  lazy  and  hates  hard  work,  a  girl 
whose  mind  is  rather  feeble,  who  is  of  "subnormal  intelli 
gence,"  as  the  phrase  now  goes,  or  a  girl  who  craves  cheap 
finery  and  vapid  pleasure,  is  always  in  danger.  A  high  ideal 
of  personal  purity  is  essential.  Where  the  same  pressure 
under  the  same  economic  conditions  has  tenfold  the  effect 
on  one  set  of  people  that  it  has  on  another,  it  is  evident  that 
the  question  of  moral  standards  is  even  more  important 
than  the  question  of  economic  standards,  very  important 
though  this  question  is.  It  is  important  for  us  to  remember 
that  the  girl  ought  to  have  the  chance,  not  only  for  the 
necessaries  of  life,  but  for  innocent  pleasure ;  and  that  even 
more  than  the  man  she  must  not  be  broken  by  overwork,  by 
excessive  toil.  Moreover,  public  opinion  and  the  law  should 
combine  to  hunt  down  the  "flagrant  man  swine"  who  him- 


THE   NEW   YORK  POLICE  199 

self  hunts  down  poor  or  silly  or  unprotected  girls.  But  we 
must  not,  in  foolish  sentimentality,  excuse  the  girl  from  her 
duty  to  keep  herself  pure.  Our  duty  to  achieve  the  same 
moral  level  for  the  two  sexes  must  be  performed  by  raising 
the  level  for  the  man,  not  by  lowering  it  for  the  woman; 
and  the  fact  that  society  must  recognize  its  duty  in  no  shape 
or  way  relieves,  not  even  to  the  smallest  degree,  the  indi 
vidual  from  doing  his  or  her  duty.  Sentimentality  which 
grows  maudlin  on  behalf  of  the  willful  prostitute  is  a  curse ; 
to  confound  her  with  the  entrapped  or  coerced  girl,  the  real 
white  slave,  is  both  foolish  and  wicked.  There  are  evil 
women  just  as  there  are  evil  men,  naturally  depraved  girls 
just  as  there  are  naturally  depraved  young  men;  and  the 
right  and  wise  thing,  the  just  thing,  to  them,  and  the  gener 
ous  thing  to  innocent  girls  and  decent  men,  is  to  wage  stern 
war  against  the  evil  creatures  of  both  sexes. 

In  company  with  Jacob  Kiis,  I  did  much  work  that  was 
not  connected  with  the  actual  discipline  of  the  force  or  in 
deed  with  the  actual  work  of  the  force.  There  was  one  thing 
which  he  and  I  abolished — police  lodging-houses,  which  were 
simply  tramp  lodging-houses,  and  a  fruitful  encouragement 
to  vagrancy.  Those  who  read  Mr.  Biis's  story  of  his  own 
life  will  remember  the  incidents  that  gave  him  from  actual 
personal  experience  his  horror  of  these  tramp  lodging- 
houses.  As  member  of  the  Health  Board  I  was  brought  into 
very  close  relations  with  the  conditions  of  life  in  the  tene 
ment-house  districts.  Here  again  I  used  to  visit  the  differ 
ent  tenement-house  regions,  usually  in  company  with  Eiis, 
to  see  for  myself  what  the  conditions  were.  It  was  largely 
this  personal  experience  that  enabled  me  while  on  the 
Health  Board  to  struggle  not  only  zealously,  but  with  rea 
sonable  efficiency  and  success,  to  improve  conditions.  We 
did  our  share  in  making  forward  strides  in  the  matter  of 
housing  the  working  people  of  the  city  with  some  regard  to 
decency  and  comfort. 

The  midnight  trips  that  Eiis  and  I  took  enabled  me  to 
see  what  the  Police  Department  was  doing,  and  also  gave 
me  personal  insight  into  some  of  the  problems  of  city  life. 


200    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

It  is  one  thing  to  listen  in  perfunctory  fashion  to  tales  of 
overcrowded  tenements,  and  it  is  quite  another  actually  to 
see  what  that  overcrowding  means,  some  hot  summer  night, 
by  even  a  single  inspection  during  the  hours  of  darkness. 
There  was  a  very  hot  spell  one  midsummer  while  I  was 
Police  Commissioner,  and  most  of  each  night  I  spent  walk 
ing  through  the  tenement-house  districts  and  visiting  police 
stations  to  see  what  was  being  done.  It  was  a  tragic  week. 
"We  did  everything  possible  to  alleviate  the  suffering.  Much 
of  it  was  heartbreaking,  especially  the  gasping  misery  of 
the  little  children  and  of  the  worn-out  mothers.  Every 
resource  of  the  Health  Department,  of  the  Police  Depart 
ment,  and  even  the  Fire  Department  (which  flooded  the 
hot  streets)  was  taxed  in  the  effort  to  render  service.  The 
heat  killed  such  multitudes  of  horses  that  the  means  at 
our  disposal  for  removing  the  poor  dead  beasts  proved 
quite  inadequate,  although  every  nerve  was  strained  to  the 
limit.  In  consequence  we  received  scores  of  complaints 
from  persons  before  whose  doors  dead  horses  had  remained, 
festering  in  the  heat,  for  two  or  three  days.  One  irascible 
man  sent  us  furious  denunciations,  until  we  were  at  last 
able  to  send  a  big  dray  to  drag  away  the  horse  that  lay 
dead  before  his  shop  door.  The  huge  dray  already  contained 
eleven  other  dead  horses,  and  when  it  reached  this  particu 
lar  door  it  broke  down,  and  it  was  hours  before  it  could 
be  moved.  The  unfortunate  man  who  had  thus  been  cursed 
with  a  granted  wish  closed  his  doors  in  despair  and  wrote 
us  a  final  pathetic  letter  in  which  he  requested  us  to  remove 
either  the  horses  or  his  shop,  he  didn't  care  which. 

I  have  spoken  before  of  my  experience  with  the  tenement- 
house  cigar  factory  law  whieh  the  highest  court  of  New 
York  State  declared  unconstitutional.  My  experience  in  the 
Police  Department  taught  me  that  not  a  few  of  the  worst 
tenement-houses  were  owned  by  wealthy  individuals,  who 
hired  the  best  and  most  expensive  lawyers  to  persuade  the 
courts  that  it  was  "unconstitutional"  to  insist  on  the  better 
ment  of  conditions.  These  business  men  and  lawyers  were 
very  adroit  in  using  a  word  with  fine  and  noble  associations 


THE    NEW   YORK   POLICE  201 

to  cloak  their  opposition  to  vitally  necessary  movements  for 
industrial  fair  play  and  decency.  They  made  it  evident 
that  they  valued  the  Constitution,  not  as  a  help  to  right 
eousness,  but  as  a  means  for  thwarting  movements  against 
unrighteousness.  After  my  experience  with  them  I  became 
more  set  than  ever  in  my  distrust  of  those  men,  whether 
business  men  or  lawyers,  judges,  legislators,  or  executive 
officers,  who  seek  to  make  of  the  Constitution  a  fetich  for 
the  prevention  of  the  work  of  social  reform,  for  the  preven 
tion  of  work  in  the  interest  of  those  men,  women,  and  chil 
dren  on  whose  behalf  we  should  be  at  liberty  to  employ 
freely  every  governmental  agency. 

Occasionally  during  the  two  years  we  had  to  put  a  stop 
to  riotous  violence,  and  now  and  then  on  these  occasions 
some  of  the  labor  union  leaders  protested  against  the  ac 
tions  of  the  police.  By  this  time  I  was  becoming  a  strong  be 
liever  in  labor  unions,  a  strong  believer  in  the  rights  of 
labor.  For  that  very  reason  I  was  all  the  more  bound  to 
see  that  lawlessness  and  disorder  were  put  down,  and  that 
no  rioter  was  permitted  to  masquerade  under  the  guise  of 
being  a  friend  of  labor  or  a  sympathizer  with  labor.  I  was 
scrupulous  to  see  that  the  labor  men  had  fair  play ;  that,  for 
instance,  they  were  allowed  to  picket  just  so  far  as  under 
the  law  picketing  could  be  permitted,  so  that  the  strikers 
had  ample  opportunity  peacefully  to  persuade  other  labor 
men  not  to  take  their  places.  But  I  made  it  clearly  and 
definitely  understood  that  under  no  circumstances  would  I 
permit  violence  or  fail  to  insist  upon  the  keeping  of  order. 
If  there  were  wrongs,  I  would  join  with  a  full  heart  in  striv 
ing  to  have  them  corrected.  But  where  there  was  violence 
all  other  questions  had  to  drop  until  order  was  restored. 
This  is  a  democracy,  and  the  people  have  the  power,  if  they 
choose  to  exercise  it,  to  make  conditions  as  they  ought  to  be 
made,  and  to  do  this  strictly  within  the  law ;  and  therefore 
the  first  duty  of  the  true  democrat,  of  the  man  really  loyal  to 
the  principles  of  popular  government,  is  to  see  that  law  is 
enforced  and  order  upheld.  It  was  a  peculiar  gratification 
to  me  that  so  many  of  the  labor  leaders  with  whom  I  was 


202    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

thrown  in  contact  grew  cordially  to  accept  this  view.  When 
I  left  the  Department,  several  called  upon  me  to  say  how 
sorry  they  were  that  I  was  not  to  continue  in  office.  One, 
the  secretary  of  the  Journeyman  Bakers'  and  Confec 
tioners'  International  Union,  Henry  Weismann,  wrote  me 
expressing  his  regret  that  I  was  going,  and  his  appreciation 
as  a  citizen  of  what  I  had  done  as  Police  Commissioner ;  he 
added:  "I  am  particularly  grateful  for  your  liberal  atti 
tude  toward  organized  labor,  your  cordial  championship 
of  those  speaking  in  behalf  of  the  toilers,  and  your  evident 
desire  to  do  the  right  thing  as  you  saw  it  at  whatever  cost." 

Some  of  the  letters  I  received  on  leaving  the  Department 
were  from  unexpected  sources.  Mr.  E.  L.  Godkin,  an 
editor  who  in  international  matters  was  not  a  patriotic  man, 
wrote  protesting  against  my  taking  the  Assistant-Secretary 
ship  of  the  Navy  and  adding:  "I  have  a  concern,  as  the 
Quakers  say,  to  put  on  record  my  earnest  belief  that  in  New 
York  you  are  doing  the  greatest  work  of  which  any  Ameri 
can  to-day  is  capable,  and  exhibiting  to  the  young  men  of 
the  country  the  spectacle  of  a  very  important  office  admin 
istered  by  a  man  of  high  character  in  the  most  efficient  way 
amid  a  thousand  difficulties.  As  a  lesson  in  politics  I  can 
not  think  of  anything  more  instructive." 

About  the  same  time  I  had  a  letter  from  Mr.  (afterwards 
Ambassador)  James  Bryce,  also  expressing  regret  that  I 
was  leaving  the  Police  Department,  but  naturally  with 
much  more  appreciation  of  the  work  that  was  to  be  done  in 
the  Navy  Department.  This  letter  I  quote,  with  his  per 
mission,  because  it  conveys  a  lesson  to  those  who  are  in 
clined  always  to  think  that  the  conditions  of  the  present 
time  are  very  bad.  It  was  written  July  7, 1897.  Mr.  Bryce 
spoke  of  the  possibility  of  coming  to  America  in  a  month 
or  so,  and  continued:  "I  hope  I  may  have  a  chance  of  see 
ing  you  if  I  do  get  over,  and  of  drawing  some  comfort  from 
you  as  regards  your  political  phenomena,  which,  so  far  as 
I  can  gather  from  those  of  your  countrymen  I  have  lately 
seen,  furnish  some  good  opportunities  for  a  persistent 
optimist  like  myself  to  show  that  he  is  not  to  be  lightly  dis- 


THE    NEW   YORK   POLICE  203 

couraged.  Don't  suppose  that  things  are  specially  'nice,'  as 
a  lady  would  say,  in  Europe  either.  They  are  not."  Mr. 
Bryce  was  a  very  friendly  and  extraordinary  competent  ob 
server  of  things  American ;  and  there  was  this  distinct  note 
of  discouragement  about  our  future  in  the  intimate  letter 
he  was  thus  sending.  Yet  this  was  at  the  very  time  when  the 
United  States  was  entering  on  a  dozen  years  during  which 
our  people  accomplished  more  good,  and  came  nearer  realiz 
ing  the  possibilities  of  a  great,  free,  and  conscientious  de 
mocracy,  than  during  any  other  dozen  years  in  our  history, 
save  only  the  years  of  Lincoln's  Presidency  and  the  period 
during  which  the  Nation  was  founded. 


CHAPTER   VII 

THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY 

I  SUPPOSE  the  United  States  will  always  be  unready  for  war, 
and  in  consequence  will  always  be  exposed  to  great  expense, 
and  to  the  possibility  of  the  gravest  calamity,  when  the 
Nation  goes  to  war.  This  is  no  new  thing.  Americans 
learn  only  from  catastrophes  and  not  from  experience. 

There  would  have  been  no  war  in  1812  if,  in  the  previous 
decade,  America,  instead  of  announcing  that  "  peace  was 
her  passion,"  instead  of  acting  on  the  theory  that  unpre- 
paredness  averts  war,  had  been  willing  to  go  to  the  expense 
of  providing  a  fleet  of  a  score  of  ships  of  the  line.  However, 
in  that  case,  doubtless  the  very  men  who  in  the  actual  event 
deplored  the  loss  of  life  and  waste  of  capital  which  their 
own  supineness  had  brought  about  would  have  loudly  in 
veighed  against  the  "excessive  and  improper  cost  of  arma 
ments";  so  it  all  came  to  about  the  same  thing  in  the  end. 

There  is  no  more  thoroughgoing  international  Mrs. 
Gummidge,  and  no  more  utterly  useless  and  often  utterly 
mischievous  citizen,  than  the  peace-at-any-price,  universal- 
arbitration  type  of  being,  who  is  always  complaining  either 
about  war  or  else  about  the  cost  of  the  armaments  which 
act  as  the  insurance  against  war.  There  is  every  reason 
why  we  should  try  to  limit  the  cost  of  armaments,  as  these 
tend  to  grow  excessive,  but  there  is  also  every  reason  to  re 
member  that  in  the  present  stage  of  civilization  a  proper 
armament  is  the  surest  guarantee  of  peace — and  is  the  only 
guarantee  that  war,  if  it  does  come,  will  not  mean  irrepar 
able  and  overwhelming  disaster. 

In  the  spring  of  1897  President  McKinley  appointed  me 
Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Navy.  I  owed  the  appointment 
chiefly  to  the  efforts  of  Senator  H.  C.  Lodge  of  Massachu- 

204 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        205 

setts,  who  doubtless  was  actuated  mainly  by  his  long  and 
close  friendship  for  me,  but  also — I  like  to  believe — by  his 
keen  interest  in  the  navy.  The  first  book  I  had  ever  pub 
lished,  fifteen  years  previously,  was  "The  History  of  the 
Naval  War  of  1812";  and  I  have  always  taken  the  interest 
in  the  navy  which  every  good  American  ought  to  take.  At 
the  time  I  wrote  the  book,  in  the  early  eighties,  the  navy  had 
reached  its  nadir,  and  we  were  then  utterly  incompetent  to 
fight  Spain  or  any  other  power  that  had  a  navy  at  all. 
Shortly  afterwards  we  began  timidly  and  hesitatingly  to 
build  up  a  fleet.  It  is  amusing  to  recall  the  roundabout 
steps  we  took  to  accomplish  our  purpose.  In  the  reaction 
after  the  colossal  struggle  of  the  Civil  War  our  strongest 
and  most  capable  men  had  thrown  their  whole  energy  into 
business,  into  money-making,  into  the  development,  and 
above  all  the  exploitation  and  exhaustion  at  the  most  rapid 
rate  possible,  of  our  natural  resources — mines,  forests, 
soil,  and  rivers.  These  men  were  not  weak  men,  but  they 
permitted  themselves  to  grow  shortsighted  and  selfish ;  and 
while  many  of  them  down  at  the  bottom  possessed  the  fun 
damental  virtues,  including  the  fighting  virtues,  others  were 
purely  of  the  glorified  huckster  or  glorified  pawnbroker 
type — which  when  developed  to  the  exclusion  of  everything 
else  makes  about  as  poor  a  national  type  as  the  world  has 
seen.  This  unadulterated  huckster  or  pawnbroker  type  is 
irarely  keenly  sympathetic  in  matters  of  social  and  indus 
trial  justice,  and  is  usually  physically  timid  and  likes  to 
cover  an  unworthy  fear  of  the  most  just  war  under  high- 
sounding  names. 

It  was  reenforced  by  the  large  mollycoddle  vote — the 
people  who  are  soft  physically  and  morally,  or  who  have  a 
twist  in  them  which  makes  them  acidly  cantankerous  and 
unpleasant  as  long  as  they  can  be  so  with  safety  to  their 
bodies.  In  addition  there  are  the  good  people  with  no 
imagination  and  no  foresight,  who  think  war  will  not  come, 
but  that  if  it  does  come  armies  and  navies  can  be  improvised 

-a  very  large  element,  typified  by  a  Senator  I  knew  per 
sonally  who,  in  a  public  speech,  in  answer  to  a  question  KS 


206    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

to  what  we  would  do  if  America  were  suddenly  assailed  by 
a  first-class  military  power,  answered  that  "we  would  build 
a  battle-ship  in  every  creek."  Then,  among  the  wise  and 
high-minded  people  who  in  self-respecting  and  genuine 
fashion  strive  earnestly  for  peace,  there  are  the  foolish 
fanatics  always  to  be  found  in  such  a  movement  and  always 
discrediting  it — the  men  who  form  the  lunatic  fringe  in  all 
reform  movements. 

All  these  elements  taken  together  made  a  body  of  public 
opinion  so  important  during  the  decades  immediately  suc 
ceeding  the  Civil  War  as  to  put  a  stop  to  any  serious  effort 
to  keep  the  Nation  in  a  condition  of  reasonable  military  pre 
paredness.  The  representatives  of  this  opinion  then  voted 
just  as  they  now  do  when  they  vote  against  battle-ships 
or  against  fortifying  the  Panama  Canal.  It  would  have 
been  bad  enough  if  we  had  been  content  to  be  weak,  and, 
in  view  of  our  weakness,  not  to  bluster.  But  we  were  not 
content  with  such  a  policy.  We  wished  to  enjoy  the  in 
compatible  luxuries  of  an  unbridled  tongue  and  an  unready 
hand.  There  was  a  very  large  element  which  was  ignorant 
of  our  military  weakness,  or,  naturally  enough,  unable  to 
understand  it;  and  another  large  element  which  liked  to 
please  its  own  vanity  by  listening  to  offensive  talk  about 
foreign  nations.  Accordingly,  too  many  of  our  politicians, 
especially  in  Congress,  found  that  the  cheap  and  easy  thing 
to  do  was  to  please  the  foolish  peace  people  by  keeping  us 
weak,  and  to  please  the  foolish  violent  people  by  passing 
denunciatory  resolutions  about  international  matters — reso 
lutions  which  would  have  been  improper  even  if  we  had  been 
strong.  Their  idea  was  to  please  both  the  mollycoddle  vote 
and  the  vote  of  the  international  tail-twisters  by  upholding, 
with  pretended  ardor  and  mean  intelligence,  a  National 
policy  of  peace  with  insult. 

I  abhor  unjust  war.  I  abhor  injustice  and  bullying  by 
the  strong  at  the  expense  of  the  weak,  whether  among  na 
tions  or  individuals.  1  abhor  violence  and  bloodshed.  I  be 
lieve  that  war  should  never  be  resorted  to  when,  or  so  long 
as,  it  is  honorably  possible  to  avoid  it.  I  respect  all  men 


THE  WAR  OF  AMERICA  THE   UNREADY        207 

and  women  who  from  high  motives  and  with  sanity  and 
self-respect  do  all  they  can  to  avert  war.  I  advocate  prep 
aration  for  war  in  order  to  avert  war;  and  I  should  never 
advocate  war  unless  it  were  the  only  alternative  to  dis 
honor.  I  describe  the  folly  of  which  so  many  of  our  people 
were  formerly  guilty,  in  order  that  we  may  in  our  own  day 
be  on  our  guard  against  similar  folly. 

"We  did  not  at  the  time  of  which  I  write  take  our  foreign 
duties  seriously,  and  as  we  combined  bluster  in  speech  with 
refusal  to  make  any  preparation  whatsoever  for  action,  we 
were  not  taken  seriously  in  return.  Gradually  a  slight 
change  for  the  better  occurred,  the  writings  of  Captain 
Mahan  playing  no  small  part  therein.  We  built  some 
modern  cruisers  to  start  with;  the  people  who  felt  that 
battle-ships  were  wicked  compromising  with  their  mis 
guided  consciences  by  saying  that  the  cruisers  could  be  used 
"to  protect  our  commerce" — which  they  could  not  be,  un 
less  they  had  battle-ships  to  back  them.  Then  we  attempted 
to  build  more  powerful  fighting  vessels,  and  as  there  was  a 
section  of  the  public  which  regarded  battle-ships  as  pos 
sessing  a  name  immorally  suggestive  of  violence,  we  com 
promised  by  calling  the  new  ships  armored  cruisers,  and 
making  them  combine  with  exquisite  nicety  all  the  defects 
and  none  of  the  virtues  of  both  types.  Then  we  got  to  the 
point  of  building  battle-ships.  But  there  still  remained  a 
public  opinion,  as  old  as  the  time  of  Jefferson,  which 
thought  that  in  the  event  of  war  all  our  problem  ought 
to  be  one  of  coast  defense,  that  we  should  do  nothing  except 
repel  attack ;  an  attitude  about  as  sensible  as  that  of  a  prize 
fighter  who  expected  to  win  by  merely  parrying  instead  of 
hitting.  To  meet  the  susceptibilities  of  this  large  class  of 
well-meaning  people,  we  provided  for  the  battle-ships  under 
the  name  of  "coast  defense  battle-ships";  meaning  thereby 
that  we  did  not  make  them  quite  as  seaworthy  as  they  ought 
to  have  been,  or  with  quite  as  much  coal  capacity  as  they 
ought  to  have  had.  Then  we  decided  to  build  real  battle 
ships.  But  there  still  remained  a  lingering  remnant  of  pub 
lic  opinion  that  clung  to  the  coast  defense  theory,  and  we 


208    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

met  this  in  beautiful  fashion  by  providing  for  "sea-going 
coast  defense  battle- ships" — the  fact  that  the  name  was  a 
contradiction  in  terms  being  of  very  small  consequence 
compared  to  the  fact  that  we  did  thereby  get  real  battle 
ships. 

Our  men  had  to  be  trained  to  handle  the  ships  singly 
and  in  fleet  formation,  and  they  had  to  be  trained  to  use  the 
new  weapons  of  precision  with  which  the  ships  were  armed. 
Not  a  few  of  the  older  officers,  kept  in  the  service  under  our 
foolish  rule  of  pure  seniority  promotion,  were  not  compe 
tent  for  the  task ;  but  a  proportion  of  the  older  officers  were 
excellent,  and  this  was  true  of  almost  all  the  younger  offi 
cers.  They  were  naturally  first-class  men,  trained  in  the 
admirable  naval  school  at  Annapolis.  They  were  overjoyed 
that  at  last  they  were  given  proper  instruments  to  work 
with,  and  they  speedily  grew  to  handle  these  ships  individ 
ually  in  the  best  fashion.  They  were  fast  learning  to  handle 
them  in  squadron  and  fleet  formation;  but  when  the  war 
with  Spain  broke  out,  they  had  as  yet  hardly  grasped  the 
principles  of  modern  scientific  naval  gunnery. 

Soon  after  I  began  work  as  Assistant  Secretary  of  the 
Navy  I  became  convinced  that  the  war  would  come.  The 
revolt  in  Cuba  had  dragged  its  weary  length  until  conditions 
in  the  island  had  become  so  dreadful  as  to  be  a  standing  dis 
grace  to  us  for  permitting  them  to  exist.  There  is  much 
that  I  sincerely  admire  about  the  Spanish  character;  and 
there  are  few  men  for  whom  I  have  felt  greater  respect 
than  for  certain  gentlemen  of  Spain  whom  I  have  known. 
But  Spain  attempted  to  govern  her  colonies  on  archaic  prin 
ciples  which  rendered  her  control  of  them  incompatible 
with  the  advance  of  humanity  and  intolerable  to  the  con 
science  of  mankind.  In  1898  the  so-called  war  in  Cuba  had 
dragged  along  for  years  with  unspeakable  horror,  degrada 
tion,  and  misery.  It  was  not  "war"  at  all,  but  murderous 
oppression.  Cuba  was  devastated. 

During  those  years,  while  we  continued  at  "peace,"  sev 
eral  hundred  times  as  many  lives  were  lost,  lives  of  men, 
women,  and  children,  as  were  lost  during  the  three  months' 


Copyright  by  Clinedinst. 

MR.  ROOSEVELT  AT  His  DESK  WHEN  ASSISTANT  SECRETARY  or  THE  NAVY. 


THE    WAR    OF    AMERICA    THE    UNREADY        209 

"war"  which  put  an  end  to  this  slaughter  and  opened  a 
career  of  peaceful  progress  to  the  Cubans.  Yet  there  were 
misguided  professional  philanthropists  who  cared  so  much 
more  for  names  than  for  facts  that  they  preferred  a 
" peace "  of  continuous  murder  to  a  "war"  which  stopped 
the  murder  and  brought  real  peace.  Spain's  humiliation 
was  certain,  anyhow;  indeed,  it  was  more  certain  without 
war  than  with  it,  for  she  could  not  permanently  keep  the 
island,  and  she  minded  yielding  to  the  Cubans  more  than 
yielding  to  us.  Our  own  direct  interests  were  great,  because 
of  the  Cuban  tobacco  and  sugar,  and  especially  because  of 
Cuba's  relation  to  the  projected  Isthmian  canal.  But  even 
greater  were  our  interests  from  the  standpoint  of  humanity. 
Cuba  was  at  our  very  doors.  It  was  a  dreadful  thing  for 
us  to  sit  supinely  and  wratch  her  death  agony.  It  was  our 
duty,  even  more  from  the  standpoint  of  National  honor 
than  from  the  standpoint  of  National  interest,  to  stop  the 
devastation  and  destruction.  Because  of  these  considera 
tions  I  favored  war;  and  to-day,  when  in  retrospect  it  is 
easier  to  see  things  clearly,  there  are  few  humane  and  hon 
orable  men  who  do  not  believe  that  the  war  was  both  just 
and  necessary. 

The  big  financiers  and  the  men  generally  who  were  sus 
ceptible  to  touch  on  the  money  nerve,  and  who  cared  nothing 
for  National  honor  if  it  conflicted  even  temporarily  with 
business  prosperity,  were  against  the  war.  The  more  fatu 
ous  type  of  philanthropist  agreed  with  them.  The  news 
papers  controlled  by,  or  run  in  the  interests  of,  these  two 
classes  deprecated  war,  and  did  everything  in  their  power 
to  prevent  any  preparation  for  war.  As  a  whole  the  people 
in  Congress  were  at  that  time  (and  are  now)  a  shortsighted 
set  as  regards  international  matters.  There  were  a  few 
men,  Senators  Cushman  K.  Davis,1  for  instance,  and  John 

1  In  a  letter  written  me  just  before  I  became  Assistant  Secretary,  Senator 
Davis  unburdened  his  mind  about  one  of  the  foolish  "peace"  proposals  of  that 
period;  his  letter  running  in  part:  "I  left  the  Senate  Chamber  about  three 
o'clock  this  afternoon  when  there  was  going  on  a  deal  of  mowing  and  chatter 
ing  over  the  treaty  by  which  the  United  States  is  to  be  bound  to  arbitrate  its 
sovereign  functions — for  policies  are  matters  of  sovereignty.  .  .  .  The  aberra 
tions  of  the  social  movement  are  neither  progress  nor  retrogression.  They  rep- 


210    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Morgan,  who  did  look  ahead;  and  Senator  H.  C.  Lodge, 
who  throughout  his  quarter  of  a  century  of  service  in  the 
Senate  and  House  has  ever  stood  foremost  among  those 
who  uphold  with  farsighted  fearlessness  and  strict  justice 
to  others  our  national  honor  and  interest;  but  most  of  the 
Congressmen  were  content  to  follow  the  worst  of  all  pos 
sible  courses,  that  is,  to  pass  resolutions  which  made  war 
more  likely,  and  yet  to  decline  to  take  measures  which  would 
enable  us  to  meet  the  war  if  it  did  come. 

However,  in  the  Navy  Department  we  were  able  to  do  a 
good  deal,  thanks  to  the  energy  and  ability  of  some  of 
the  bureau  chiefs,  and  to  the  general  good  tone  of  the  serv 
ice.  I  soon  found  my  natural  friends  and  allies  in  such 
men  as  Evans,  Taylor,  Sampson,  Wainwright,  Brownson, 
Schroeder,  Bradford,  Cowles,  Cameron,  Winslow,  O'Neil, 
and  others  like  them.  I  used  all  the  power  there  was  in  my 
office  to  aid  these  men  in  getting  the  material  ready.  I  also 
tried  to  gather  from  every  source  information  as  to  who  the 
best  men  were  to  occupy  the  fighting  positions. 

Sound  naval  opinion  was  overwhelmingly  in  favor  of 
Dewey  to  command  one  squadron.  I  was  already  watching 
him,  for  I  had  been  struck  by  an  incident  in  his  past  career. 
It  was  at  a  time  when  there  was  threat  of  trouble  with  Chile. 
Dewey  was  off  the  Argentine,  and  was  told  to  get  ready  to 
move  to  the  other  coast  of  South  America.  If  the  move  be 
came  necessary,  he  would  have  to  have  coal,  and  yet  if  he 
did  not  make  the  move,  the  coal  would  not  be  needed.  In 
such  a  case  a  man  afraid  of  responsibility  always  acts 

resent  merely  a  local  and  temporary  sagging  of  the  line  of  the  great  orbit.  Ten 
nyson  knew  this  when  he  wrote  that  fine  and  noble  'Maud/  I  often  read  it,  for 
to  do  so  does  me  good."  After  quoting  one  of  Poe's  stories  the  letter  continues : 
"The  world  will  come  out  all  right.  Let  him  who  believes  in  the  decline  of 
the  military  spirit  observe  the  boys  of  a  common  school  during  the  recess  or 
the  noon  hour.  Of  course,  when  American  patriotism  speaks  out  from  its  rank 
and  file  and  demands  action  or  expression,  and  when,  thereupon,  the  'business 
man/  so  called,  places  his  hand  on  his  stack  of  reds  as  if  he  feared  a  policeman 
were  about  to  disturb  the  game,  and  protests  until  American  patriotism  ceases 
to  continue  to  speak  as  it  had  started  to  do — why,  you  and  I  get  mad,  and  I 
swear.  I  hope  you  will  be  with  us  here  after  March  4.  We  can  then  pass 
judgment  together  on  the  things  we  don't  like,  and  together  indulge  in  hopes 
that  I  believe  are  prophetic." 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        211 

rigidly  by  the  regulations  and  communicates  with  the  De 
partment  at  home  to  get  authority  for  everything  he  does ; 
and  therefore  he  usually  accomplishes  nothing  whatever, 
but  is  able  to  satisfy  all  individuals  with  red-tape  minds  by 
triumphantly  pointing  out  his  compliance  with  the  regula 
tions.  In  a  crisis,  the  man  worth  his  salt  is  the  man  who 
meets  the  needs  of  the  situation  in  whatever  way  is  neces 
sary.  Dewey  purchased  the  coal  and  was  ready  to  move  at 
once  if  need  arose.  The  affair  blew  over ;  the  need  to  move 
did  not  occur;  and  for  some  time  there  seemed  to  be  a 
chance  that  Dewey  would  get  into  trouble  over  having  pur 
chased  the  coal,  for  our  people  are  like  almost  all  other 
peoples  in  requiring  responsible  officers  under  such  condi 
tions  to  decide  at  their  own  personal  peril,  no  matter  which 
course  they  follow.  However,  the  people  higher  up  ulti 
mately  stood  by  Dewey. 

The  incident  made  me  feel  that  here  was  a  man  who  could 
be  relied  upon  to  prepare  in  advance,  and  to  act  promptly, 
fearlessly,  and  on  his  own  responsibility  when  the  emer 
gency  arose.  Accordingly  I  did  my  best  to  get  him  put  in 
•command  of  the  Asiatic  fleet,  the  fleet  where  it  was  most 
essential  to  have  a  man  who  would  act  without  referring 
things  back  to  the  home  authorities.  An  officer  senior  to 
him,  of  the  respectable  commonplace  type,  was  being  pushed 
by  certain  politicians  who  I  knew  had  influence  with  the 
Navy  Department  and  with  the  President.  I  would  have 
preferred  to  see  Dewey  get  the  appointment  without  appeal 
ing  to  any  politician  at  all.  But  while  this  was  my  pref 
erence,  the  essential  thing  was  to  get  him  the  appointment. 
For  a  naval  officer  to  bring  pressure  to  get  himself  a  soft 
and  easy  place  is  unpardonable ;  but  a  large  leniency  should 
be  observed  toward  the  man  who  uses  influence  only  to 
get  himself  a  place  in  the  picture  near  the  flashing  of  the 
guns.  There  was  a  Senator,  Proctor  of  Vermont,  who  I 
knew  was  close  to  McKinley,  and  who  was  very  ardent  for 
the  war,  and  desirous  to  have  it  fought  in  the  most  efficient 
fashion.  I  suggested  to  Dewey  that  he  should  enlist  the 
services  of  Senator  Proctor,  which  was  accordingly  done. 


212    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

In  a  fortunate  hour  for  the  Nation,  Dewey  was  given  com 
mand  of  the  Asiatic  squadron. 

When  the  Maine  was  blown  up  in  Havana  Harbor,  war 
became  inevitable.  A  number  of  the  peace-at-any-price 
men  of  course  promptly  assumed  the  position  that  she  had 
blown  herself  up;  but  investigation  showed  that  the  ex 
plosion  was  from  outside.  And,  in  any  event,  it  would 
have  been  impossible  to  prevent  war.  The  enlisted  men  of 
the  navy,  who  often  grew  bored  to  the  point  of  desertion 
in  peace,  became  keyed  up  to  a  high  pitch  of  efficiency,  and 
crowds  of  fine  young  fellows,  from  the  interior  as  well  as 
from  the  seacoast,  thronged  to  enlist.  The  navy  officers 
showed  alert  ability  and  unwearied  industry  in  getting 
things  ready.  There  was  one  deficiency,  however,  which 
there  was  no  time  to  remedy,  and  of  the  very  existence  of 
which,  strange  to  say,  most  of  our  best  men  were  ignorant. 
Our  navy  had  no  idea  how  low  our  standard  of  marks 
manship  was.  We  had  not  realized  that  the  modern  battle 
ship  had  become  such  a  complicated  piece  of  mechanism 
that  the  old  methods  of  training  in  marksmanship  were  as 
obsolete  as  the  old  muzzle-loading  broadside  guns  them 
selves.  Almost  the  only  man  in  the  navy  who  fully  realized 
this  was  our  naval  attache  at  Paris,  Lieutenant  Sims.  He 
wrote  letter  after  letter  pointing  out  how  frightfully  back 
ward  we  were  in  marksmanship.  I  was  much  impressed  by 
his  letters ;  but  Wainwright  was  about  the  only  other  man 
who  was.  And  as  Sims  proved  to  be  mistaken  in  his  belief 
that  the  French  had  taught  the  Spaniards  how  to  shoot,  and 
as  the  Spaniards  proved  to  be  much  worse  even  than  we 
were,  in  the  service  generally  Sims  was  treated  as  an  alarm 
ist.  But  although  I  at  first  partly  acquiesced  in  this  view,  I 
grew  uneasy  when  I  studied  the  small  proportion  of  hits  to 
shots  made  by  our  vessels  in  battle.  When  I  was  President 
I  took  up  the  matter,  and  speedily  became  convinced  that 
we  needed  to  revolutionize  our  whole  training  in  marks 
manship.  Sims  was  given  the  lead  in  organizing  and  in 
troducing  the  new  system;  and  to  him  more  than  to  any 


THE    WAR    OF    AMERICA    THE    UNREADY        213 

other  one  man  was  due  the  astonishing  progress  made  by 
our  fleet  in  this  respect,  a  progress  which  made  the  fleet, 
gun  for  gun,  at  least  three  times  as  effective,  in  point  of 
fighting  efficiency,  in  1908,  as  it  was  in  1902.  The  shots  that 
hit  are  the  shots  that  count ! 

Like  the  people,  the  Government  was  for  a  long  time  tin- 
willing  to  prepare  for  war,  because  so  many  honest  but  mis 
guided  men  believed  that  the  preparation  itself  tended  to 
bring  on  the  war.  I  did  not  in  the  least  share  this  feeling, 
and  whenever  I  was  left  as  Acting  Secretary  I  did  every 
thing  in  my  power  to  put  us  in  readiness.  I  knew  that  in 
the  event  of  war  Dewey  could  be  slipped  like  a  wolf-hound 
from  a  leash ;  I  was  sure  that  if  he  were  given  half  a  chance 
he  would  strike  instantly  and  with  telling  effect;  and  I 
made  up  my  mind  that  all  I  could  do  to  give  him  that  half- 
chance  should  be  done.  I  was  in  the  closest  touch  with 
Senator  Lodge  throughout  this  period,  and  either  consulted 
him  about  or  notified  him  of  all  the  moves  I  was  taking.  By 
the  end  of  February  I  felt  it  was  vital  to  send  Dewey  (as 
well  as  each  of  our  other  commanders  who  were  not  in  home 
waters)  instructions  that  would  enable  him  to  be  in  readi 
ness  for  immediate  action.  On  the  afternoon  of  Saturday, 
February  25,  when  I  was  Acting  Secretary,  Lodge  called  on 
me  just  as  I  wras  preparing  the  order,  which  (as  it  was 
addressed  to  a  man  of  the  right  stamp)  was  of  much  impor 
tance  to  the  subsequent  operations.  Admiral  Dewey  speaks 
of  the  incident  as  follows,  in  his  autobiography: 

"The  first  real  step  [as  regards  active  naval  prepara 
tions]  was  taken  on  February  25,  when  telegraphic  instruc 
tions  were  sent  to  the  Asiatic,  European,  and  South  At 
lantic  squadrons  to  rendezvous  at  certain  convenient  points 
where,  should  war  break  out,  they  would  be  most  available. 

"The  message  to  the  Asiatic  squadron  bore  the  signature 
of  that  Assistant  Secretary  who  had  seized  the  opportunity 
while  Acting  Secretary  to  hasten  preparations  for  a  con 
flict  which  was  inevitable.  As  Mr.  Roosevelt  reasoned,  pre 
cautions  for  readiness  would  cost  little  in  time  of  peace, 


214    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

and  yet  would  be  invaluable  in  case  of  war.    His  cablegram 
was  as  follows : 

11  'Washington,  February  25,    '98. 
"  'Dewey,  Hong  Kong: 

"  '  Order  the  squadron,  except  the  Monocacy,  to  Hong 
Kong.  Keep  full  of  coal.  In  the  event  of  declaration  of 
war  Spain,  your  duty  will  be  to  see  that  the  Spanish  squad 
ron  does  not  leave  the  Asiatic  coast,  and  then  offensive  oper 
ations  in  Philippine  Islands.  Keep  Olympia  until  further 
orders.  EOOSEVELT.  ' 

"(The  reference  to  keeping  the  Olympia  until  further 
orders  was  due  to  the  fact  that  I  had  been  notified  that  she 
would  soon  be  recalled  to  the  United  States.)" 

All  that  was  needed  with  Dewey  was  to  give  him  the 
chance  to  get  ready,  and  then  to  strike,  without  being 
hampered  by  orders  from  those  not  on  the  ground.  Success 
in  war  depends  very  largely  upon  choosing  a  man  fit  to 
exercise  such  powers,  and  then  giving  him  the  powers. 

It  would  be  instructive  to  remember,  if  only  we  were 
willing  to  do  so,  the  fairly  comic  panic  which  swept  in 
waves  over  our  seacoast,  first  when  it  became  evident  that 
war  was  about  to  be  declared,  and  then  when  it  was  de 
clared.  The  public  waked  up  to  the  sufficiently  obvious  fact 
that  the  Government  was  in  its  usual  state — perennial  un 
readiness  for  war.  Thereupon  the  people  of  the  seaboard 
district  passed  at  one  bound  from  unreasoning  confidence 
that  war  never  could  come  to  unreasoning  fear  as  to  what 
might  happen  now  that  it  had  come.  That  acute  philoso 
pher  Mr.  Dooley  proclaimed  that  in  the  Spanish  War  we 
were  in  a  dream,  but  that  the  Spaniards  were  in  a  trance. 
This  just  about  summed  up  the  facts.  Our  people  had  for 
decades  scoffed  at  the  thought  of  making  ready  for  possible 
war.  Now,  when  it  was  too  late,  they  not  only  backed  every 
measure,  wise  and  unwise,  that  offered  a  chance  of  supply 
ing  a  need  that  ought  to  have  been  met  before,  but  they  also 
fell  into  a  condition  of  panic  apprehension  as  to  what  the 
foe  might  do. 


THE    WAR   OP   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        215 

For  years  we  had  been  saying,  just  as  any  number  of  our 
people  now  say,  that  no  nation  would  venture  to  attack 
us.  Then  when  we  did  go  to  war  with  an  exceedingly  feeble 
nation,  we,  for  the  time  being,  rushed  to  the  other  extreme 
of  feeling,  and  attributed  to  this  feeble  nation  plans  of 
offensive  warfare  which  it  never  dreamed  of  making,  and 
which,  if  made,  it  would  have  been  wholly  unable  to  execute. 
Some  of  my  readers  doubtless  remember  the  sinister  in 
tentions  and  unlimited  potentialities  for  destruction  with 
which  the  fertile  imagination  of  the  yellow  press  endowed 
the  armored  cruiser  Viscaya  when  she  appeared  in  Amer 
ican  waters  just  before  war  was  declared.  The  state  of 
nervousness  along  much  of  the  seacoast  was  funny  in  view 
of  the  lack  of  foundation  for  it;  but  it  offered  food  for 
serious  thought  as  to  what  would  happen  if  we  ever  became 
engaged  with  a  serious  foe. 

The  Governor  of  one  State  actually  announced  that  he 
would  not  permit  the  National  Guard  of  that  State  to  leave 
its  borders,  the  idea  being  to  retain  it  against  a  possible 
Spanish  invasion.  So  many  of  the  business  men  of  the  city 
of  Boston  took  their  securities  inland  to  Worcester  that  the 
safe  deposit  companies  of  Worcester  proved  unable  to  take 
care  of  them.  In  my  own  neighborhood  on  Long  Island 
clauses  were  gravely  put  into  leases  to  the  effect  that  if  the 
property  were  destroyed  by  the  Spaniards  the  lease  should 
lapse.  As  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Navy  I  had  every 
conceivable  impossible  request  made  to  me.  Members  of 
Congress  who  had  actively  opposed  building  any  navy 
came  clamorously  around  to  ask  each  for  a  ship  for  some 
special  purpose  of  protection  connected  with  his  district. 
It  seems  incredible,  but  it  is  true,  that  not  only  these  Con 
gressmen  but  the  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Boards  of 
Trade  of  different  coast  cities  all  lost  their  heads  for  the 
time  being,  and  raised  a  deafening  clamor  and  brought 
every  species  of  pressure  to  bear  on  the  Administration  to 
get  it  to  adopt  the  one  most  fatal  course — that  is,  to  dis 
tribute  the  navy,  ship  by  ship,  at  all  kinds  of  points  and  in 
all  kinds  of  ports  with  the  idea  of  protecting  everything 


216    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

everywhere,  and  thereby  rendering  it  absolutely  certain 
that  even  the  Spanish  fleet,  poor  though  it  was,  would  be 
able  to  pick  up  our  own  navy  ship  by  ship  in  detail.  One 
Congressman  besought  me  for  a  ship  to  protect  Jekyll 
Island,  off  the  coast  of  Georgia,  an  island  which  derived 
its  sole  consequence  because  it  contained  the  winter  homes 
of  certain  millionaires.  A  lady  whose  husband  occupied  a 
very  influential  position,  and  who  was  normally  a  most  ad 
mirable  and  sensible  woman,  came  to  insist  that  a  ship 
should  be  anchored  off  a  huge  seaside  hotel  because  she  had 
a  house  in  the  neighborhood. 

There  were  many  such  instances.  One  stood  out  above 
the  others.  A  certain  seaboard  State  contained  in  its  Con 
gressional  delegation  one  of  the  most  influential  men  in 
the  Senate,  and  one  of  the  most  influential  men  in  the  lower 
house.  These  two  men  had  been  worse  than  lukewarm 
about  building  up  the  navy,  and  had  scoffed  at  the  idea  of 
there  ever  being  any  danger  from  any  foreign  power.  With 
the  advent  of  war  the  feelings  of  their  constituents,  and 
therefore  their  own  feelings,  suffered  an  immediate  change, 
and  they  demanded  that  a  ship  be  anchored  in  the  harbor 
of  their  city  as  a  protection.  Getting  no  comfort  from  me, 
they  went  "higher  up,"  and  became  a  kind  of  permanent 
committee  in  attendance  upon  the  President.  They  were 
very  influential  men  in  the  Houses,  with  whom  it  was  im 
portant  for  the  Administration  to  keep  on  good  terms ;  and, 
moreover,  they  possessed  a  pertinacity  as  great  as  the 
widow  who  won  her  case  from  the  unjust  judge.  Finally 
the  President  gave  in  and  notified  me  to  see  that  a  ship 
was  sent  to  the  city  in  question.  I  was  bound  that,  as  long 
as  a  ship  had  to  be  sent,  it  should  not  be  a  ship  wrorth  any 
thing.  Accordingly  a  Civil  War  Monitor,  with  one  smooth 
bore  gun,  manned  by  a  crew  of  about  twenty-one  naval 
militia,  was  sent  to  the  city  in  question,  under  convoy  of  a 
tug.  It  was  a  hazardous  trip  for  the  unfortunate  naval 
militiamen,  but  it  was  safely  accomplished;  and  joy  and 
peace  descended  upon  the  Senator  and  the  Congressman, 
and  upon  the  President  whom  they  had  jointly  harassed. 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        217 

Incidentally,  the  fact  that  the  protecting  war- vessel  would 
not  have  been  a  formidable  foe  to  any  antagonists  of  much 
more  modern  construction  than  the  galleys  of  Alcibiades 
seemed  to  disturb  nobody. 

This  was  one  side  of  the  picture.  The  other  side  was  that 
the  crisis  at  once  brought  to  the  front  any  amount  of  latent 
fighting  strength.  There  were  plenty  of  Congressmen  who 
showed  cool-headed  wisdom  and  resolution.  The  plain 
people,  the  men  and  women  back  of  the  persons  who  lost 
their  heads,  set  seriously  to  work  to  see  that  we  did  what 
ever  was  necessary,  and  made  the  job  a  thorough  one.  The 
young  men  swarmed  to  enlist.  In  time  of  peace  it  had 
been  difficult  to  fill  the  scanty  regular  army  and  navy,  and 
there  were  innumerable  desertions ;  now  the  ships  and  regi 
ments  were  over-enlisted,  and  so  many  deserters  returned 
in  order  to  fight  that  it  became  difficult  to  decide  what  to  do 
with  them.  England,  and  to  a  less  degree  Japan,  were 
friendly.  The  great  powers  of  Continental  Europe  were 
all  unfriendly.  They  jeered  at  our  ships  and  men,  and  with 
fatuous  partisanship  insisted  that  the  Spaniards  would 
prove  too  much  for  our  "mercenaries"  because  we  were  a 
commercial  people  of  low  ideals  who  could  not  fight,  while 
the  men  whom  we  attempted  to  hire  for  that  purpose  were 
certain  to  run  on  the  day  of  battle. 

Among  my  friends  was  the  then  Army  Surgeon  Leonard 
Wood.  He  was  a  surgeon.  Not  having  an  income,  he  had 
to  earn  his  own  living.  He  had  gone  through  the  Harvard 
Medical  School,  and  had  then  joined  the  army  in  the  South 
west  as  a  contract  doctor.  He  had  every  physical,  moral,- 
and  mental  quality  which  fitted  him  for  a  soldier 's  life  and 
for  the  exercise  of  command.  In  the  inconceivably  wearing 
and  harassing  campaigns  against  the  Apaches  he  had 
served  nominally  as  a  surgeon,  really  in  command  of  troops, 
on  more  than  one  expedition.  He  was  as  anxious  as  I  was 
that  if  there  were  war  we  should  both  have  our  part  in  it. 
I  had  always  felt  that  if  there  were  a  serious  war  I  wished 
to  be  in  a  position  to  explain  to  my  children  why  I  did  take 
part  in  it,  and  not  why  I  did  not  take  part  in  it.  Moreover, 


218    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT- AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

I  had  very  deeply  felt  that  it  was  our  duty  to  free  Cuba, 
and  I  had  publicly  expressed  this  feeling ;  and  when  a  man 
takes  such  a  position,  he  ought  to  be  willing  to  make  his 
words  good  by  his  deeds  unless  there  is  some  very  strong 
reason  to  the  contrary.  He  should  pay  with  his  body. 

As  soon  as  war  was  upon  us,  Wood  and  I  began  to  try 
for  a  chance  to  go  to  the  front.  Congress  had  authorized 
the  raising  of  three  National  Volunteer  Cavalry  regiments, 
wholly  apart  from  the  State  contingents.  Secretary  Alger 
of  the  War  Department  was  fond  of  me  personally,  and 
Wood  was  his  family  doctor.  Alger  had  been  a  gallant 
soldier  in  the  Civil  War,  and  was  almost  the  only  member 
of  the  Administration  who  felt  all  along  that  we  would  have 
to  go  to  war  with  Spain  over  Cuba.  He  liked  my  attitude  in 
the  matter,  and  because  of  his  remembrance  of  his  own  ex 
periences  he  sympathized  with  my  desire  to  go  to  the  front. 
Accordingly  he  offered  me  the  command  of  one  of  the  regi 
ments.  I  told  him  that  after  six  weeks'  service  in  the  field 
I  would  feel  competent  to  handle  the  regiment,  but  that  I 
would  not  know  how  to  equip  it  or  how  to  get  it  into  the 
first  action ;  but  that  Wood  was  entirely  competent  at  once 
to  take  command,  and  that  if  he  would  make  Wood  colonel 
I  would  accept  the  lieutenant-colonelcy.  General  Alger 
thought  this  an  act  of  foolish  self-abnegation  on  my  part — 
instead  of  its  being,  what  it  was,  the  wisest  act  I  could  have 
performed.  He  told  me  to  accept  the  colonelcy,  and  that 
he  would  make  Wood  lieutenant-colonel,  and  that  Wood 
would  do  the  work  anyway;  but  I  answered  that  I  did  not 
wish  to  rise  on  any  man's  shoulders;  that  I  hoped  to  be 
given  every  chance  that  my  deeds  and  abilities  warranted ; 
but  that  I  did  not  wish  what  I  did  not  earn,  and  that  above 
all  I  did  not  wish  to  hold  any  position  where  any  one  else 
did  the  work.  He  laughed  at  me  a  little  and  said  I  was 
foolish,  but  I  do  not  think  he  really  minded,  and  he  promised 
to  do  as  I  wished.  True  to  his  word,  he  secured  the  appoint 
ment  of  Wood  as  colonel  and  of  myself  as  lieutenant-colonel 
of  the  First  United  States  Volunteer  Cavalry.  This  was 
soon  nicknamed,  both  by  the  public  and  by  the  rest  of  the 


Copyright  by  Falk. 


THE  COLONEL  OF  THE  ROUGH  RIDERS. 


THE   WAR    OF   AMERICA    THE    UNREADY        219 

army,  the  Rough  Riders,  doubtless  because  the  bulk  of  the 
men  were  from  the  Southwestern  ranch  country  and  were 
skilled  in  the  wild  horsemanship  of  the  great  plains. 

Wood  instantly  began  the  work  of  raising  the  regiment. 
He  first  assembled  several  old  non-commissioned  officers  of 
experience,  put  them  in  office,  and  gave  them  blanks  for 
requisitions  for  the  full  equipment  of  a  cavalry  regiment. 
He  selected  San  Antonio  as  the  gathering-place,  as  it  was 
in  a  good  horse  country,  near  the  Gulf  from  some  port  on 
which  we  would  have  to  embark,  and  near  an  old  arsenal 
and  an  old  army  post  from  which  we  got  a  good  deal  of 
stuff — some  of  it  practically  condemned,  but  which  we 
found  serviceable  at  a  pinch,  and  much  better  than  nothing. 
He  organized  a  horse  board  in  Texas,  and  began  purchasing 
all  horses  that  were  not  too  big  and  were  sound.  A  day  or 
two  after  he  was  commissioned  he  wrote  out  in  the  office  of 
the  Secretary  of  War,  under  his  authority,  telegrams  to  the 
Governors  of  Arizona,  New  Mexico,  Oklahoma,  and  Indian 
Territory,  in  substance  as  follows : 

The  President  desires  to  raise volunteers  in  your 

Territory  to  form  part  of  a  regiment  of  mounted  riflemen  to 
be  commanded  by  Leonard  Wood,  Colonel ;  Theodore  Roose 
velt,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  He  desires  that  the  men  selected 
should  be  young,  sound,  good  shots  and  good  riders,  and 
that  you  expedite  by  all  means  in  your  power  the  enroll 
ment  of  these  men. 

(Signed)  R.  A.  ALGER,  Secretary  of  War. 

As  soon  as  he  had  attended  to  a  few  more  odds  and  ends 
he  left  Washington,  and  the  day  after  his  arrival  in  San 
Antonio  the  troops  began  to  arrive. 

For  several  weeks  before  I  joined  the  regiment,  to  which 
Wood  went  ahead  of  me,  I  continued  as  Assistant  Secretary 
of  the  Navy,  trying  to  get  some  coherence  of  plan  between 
the  War  Department  and  the  Navy  Department ;  and  also 
being  used  by  Wood  to  finish  getting  the  equipment  for 
the  regiment.  As  regards  finding  out  what  the  plans  of  the 
War  Department  were,  the  task  was  simple.  They  had  no 


220    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

plans.  Even  during  the  final  months  before  the  outbreak  of 
hostilities  very  little  was  done  in  the  way  of  efficient  prep 
aration.  On  one  occasion,  when  every  one  knew  that  the 
declaration  of  war  was  sure  to  come  in  a  few  days,  I  went  on 
military  business  to  the  office  of  one  of  the  highest  line 
generals  of  the  army,  a  man  who  at  that  moment  ought  to 
have  been  working  eighteen  hours  out  of  the  twenty-four 
on  the  vital  problems  ahead  of  him.  What  he  was  actually 
doing  was  trying  on  a  new  type  of  smart-looking  uniform  on 
certain  enlisted  men ;  and  he  called  me  in  to  ask  my  advice 
as  to  the  position  of  the  pockets  in  the  blouse,  with  a  view 
to  making  it  look  attractive.  An  aide  of  this  general — 
funnily  enough  a  good  fighting  man  in  actual  service — when 
I  consulted  him  as  to  what  my  uniform  for  the  campaign 
should  be,  laid  special  stress  upon  my  purchasing  a  pair  of 
black  top  boots  for  full  dress,  explaining  that  they  were 
very  effective  on  hotel  piazzas  and  in  parlors.  I  did  not  in 
tend  to  be  in  any  hotel  if  it  could  possibly  be  avoided ;  and 
as  things  turned  out,  I  had  no  full-dress  uniform,  nothing 
but  my  service  uniform,  during  my  brief  experience  in  the 
army. 

I  suppose  that  war  always  does  bring  out  what  is  highest 
and  lowest  in  human  nature.  The  contractors  who  furnish 
poor  materials  to  the  army  or  the  navy  in  time  of  war  stand 
on  a  level  of  infamy  only  one  degree  above  that  of  the  par 
ticipants  in  the  white  slave  traffic  themselves.  But  there 
is  conduct  far  short  of  this  which  yet  seems  inexplicable 
to  any  man  who  has  in  him  any  spirit  of  disinterested 
patriotism  combined  with  any  power  of  imagination.  Ke- 
spectable  men,  who  I  suppose  lack  the  imagination  thor 
oughly  to  realize  what  they  are  doing,  try  to  make  money 
out  of  the  Nation's  necessities  in  war  at  the  very  time  that 
other  men  are  making  every  sacrifice,  financial  and  per 
sonal,  for  the  cause.  In  the  closing  weeks  of  my  service  as 
Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Navy  we  were  collecting  ships 
for  auxiliary  purposes.  Some  men,  at  cost  to  their  own 
purses,  helped  us  freely  and  with  efficiency ;  others  treated 
the  affair  as  an  ordinary  business  transaction;  and  yet 


THE    WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        221 

others  endeavored,  at  some  given  crisis  when  our  need  was 
great,  to  sell  us  inferior  vessels  at  exorbitant  prices,  and 
used  every  pressure,  through  Senators  and  Congressmen,  to 
accomplish  their  ends.  In  one  or  two  cases  they  did  ac 
complish  them  too,  until  we  got  a  really  first-class  board 
established  to  superintend  such  purchases.  A  more  curious 
experience  was  in  connection  with  the  point  chosen  for  the 
starting  for  the  expedition  against  Cuba.  I  had  not  sup 
posed  that  any  human  being  could  consider  this  matter  save 
from  the  standpoint  of  military  need.  But  one  morning  a 
very  wealthy  and  influential  man,  a  respectable  and  upright 
man  according  to  his  own  lights,  called  on  me  to  protest 
against  our  choice  of  Tampa,  and  to  put  in  a  plea  for  a  cer 
tain  other  port,  on  the  ground  that  his  railroad  was  entitled 
to  its  share  of  the  profit  for  hauling  the  army  and  equip 
ment!  I  happened  to  know  that  at  this  time  this  very  man 
had  kinsfolk  with  the  army,  who  served  gallantly,  and  the 
circumstances  of  his  coming  to  me  were  such  as  to  show 
that  he  was  not  acting  secretly,  and  had  no  idea  that  there 
was  anything  out  of  the  way  in  his  proposal.  I  think  the 
facts  were  merely  that  he  had  been  trained  to  regard  busi 
ness  as  the  sole  object  in  life,  and  that  he  lacked  the  imagi 
nation  to  enable  him  to  understand  the  real  nature  of  the  re 
quest  that  he  was  making ;  and,  moreover,  he  had  good  rea 
son  to  believe  that  one  of  his  business  competitors  had  been 
unduly  favored. 

The  War  Department  was  in  far  worse  shape  than  the 
Navy  Department.  The  young  officers  turned  out  from 
West  Point  are  precisely  as  good  as  the  young  officers 
turned  out  from  Annapolis,  and  this  always  has  been  true. 
But  at  that  time  (something  has  been  done  to  remedy  the 
worst  conditions  since),  and  ever  since  the  close  of  the  Civil 
War,  the  conditions  were  such  that  after  a  few  years  the 
army  officer  stagnated  so  far  as  his  profession  was  con 
cerned.  When  the  Spanish  War  broke  out  the  navy  really 
was  largely  on  a  war  footing,  as  any  navy  which  is  even 
respectably  cared  for  in  time  of  peace  must  be.  The  ad 
mirals,  captains,  and  lieutenants  were  continually  practic- 


222    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ing  their  profession  in  almost  precisely  the  way  that  it  has 
to  be  practiced  in  time  of  war.  Except  actually  shooting  at 
a  foe,  most  of  the  men  on  board  ship  went  through  in  time 
of  peace  practically  all  that  they  would  have  to  go  through 
in  time  of  war.  The  heads  of  bureaus  in  the  Navy  Depart 
ment  were  for  the  most  part  men  who  had  seen  sea  service, 
who  expected  to  return  to  sea  service,  and  who  were  pre 
paring  for  needs  which  they  themselves  knew  by  experience. 
Moreover,  the  civilian  head  of  the  navy  had  to  provide  for 
keeping  the  ships  in  a  state  of  reasonable  efficiency,  and 
Congress  could  not  hopelessly  misbehave  itself  about  the 
navy  without  the  fact  at  once  becoming  evident. 

All  this  was  changed  so  far  as  the  army  was  concerned. 
Not  only  was  it  possible  to  decrease  the  efficiency  of  the 
army  without  being  called  to  account  for  it,  but  the  only 
way  in  which  the  Secretary  of  War  could  gain  credit  for 
himself  or  the  Administration  was  by  economy,  and  the 
easiest  way  to  economize  was  in  connection  with  something 
that  would  not  be  felt  unless  war  should  arise.  The  people 
took  no  interest  whatever  in  the  army;  demagogues  clam 
ored  against  it,  and,  inadequate  though  it  was  in  size,  in 
sisted  that  it  should  be  still  further  reduced.  Popular 
orators  always  appealed  to  the  volunteers ;  the  regulars  had 
no  votes  and  there  was  no  point  in  politicians  thinking  of 
them.  The  chief  activity  shown  by  Congressmen  about  the 
army  was  in  getting  special  army  posts  built  in  places  where 
there  was  no  need  for  them.  Even  the  work  of  the  army  in 
its  campaigns  against  the  Indians  was  of  such  a  character 
that  it  was  generally  performed  by  small  bodies  of  fifty  or 
a  hundred  men.  Until  a  man  ceased  being  a  lieutenant  he 
usually  had  plenty  of  professional  work  to  attend  to  and 
was  employed  in  the  field,  and,  in  short,  had  the  same  kind 
of  practice  that  his  brother  in  the  navy  had,  and  he  did  his 
work  as  well.  But  once  past  this  stage  he  had  almost  no 
opportunity  to  perform  any  work  corresponding  to  his  rank, 
and  but  little  opportunity  to  do  any  military  work  whatso 
ever.  The  very  best  men,  men  like  Lawton,  Young,  Chaffee, 
Hawkins,  and  Sumner,  to  mention  only  men  under  or  be- 


THE   WAR   OF    AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        223 

side  whom  I  served,  remained  good  soldiers,  soldiers  of  the 
best  stamp,  in  spite  of  the  -disheartening  conditions.  But  it 
was  not  to  be  expected  that  the  average  man  could  continue 
to  grow  when  every  influence  was  against  him.  Accord 
ingly,  when  the  Spanish  War  suddenly  burst  upon  us,  a 
number  of  inert  elderly  captains  and  field  officers  were, 
much  against  their  own  wishes,  suddenly  pitchforked  into 
the  command  of  regiments,  brigades,  and  even  divisions  and 
army  corps.  Often  these  men  failed  painfully.  This  was 
not  their  fault;  it  was  the  fault  of  the  Nation,  that  is,  the 
fault  of  all  of  us,  of  you,  my  reader,  and  of  myself,  and  of 
those  like  us,  because  we  had  permitted  conditions  to  be 
such  as  to  render  these  men  unfit  for  command.  Take  a 
stout  captain  of  an  out-of-the-way  two-company  post,  where 
nothing  in  the  world  ever  occurred  even  resembling  mili 
tary  action,  and  where  the  only  military  problem  that  really 
convulsed  the  post  to  its  foundations  was  the  quarrel  be 
tween  the  captain  and  the  quartermaster  as  to  how  high  a 
mule's  tail  ought  to  be  shaved  (I  am  speaking  of  an  actual 
incident).  What  could  be  expected  of  such  a  man,  even 
though  thirty-five  years  before  he  had  been  a  gallant  second 
lieutenant  in  the  Civil  War,  if,  after  this  intervening  do- 
nothing  period,  he  was  suddenly  put  in  command  of  raw 
troops  in  a  midsummer  campaign  in  the  tropics? 

The  bureau  chiefs  were  for  the  most  part  elderly  incom 
petents,  whose  idea  was  to  do  their  routine  duties  in  such 
way  as  to  escape  the  censure  of  routine  bureaucratic  su 
periors  and  to  avoid  a  Congressional  investigation.  They 
had  not  the  slightest  conception  of  preparing  the  army  for 
war.  It  was  impossible  that  they  could  have  any  such  con 
ception.  The  people  and  the  Congress  did  not  wish  the 
army  prepared  for  war ;  and  those  editors  and  philanthro 
pists  and  peace  advocates  who  felt  vaguely  that  if  the  army 
were  incompetent  their  principles  were  safe,  always  in 
veighed  against  any  proposal  to  make  it  efficient,  on  the 
ground  that  this  showed  a  natural  bloodthirstiness  in  the 
proposer.  When  such  were  the  conditions,  it  was  absolutely 
impossible  that  either  the  War  Department  or  the  army 


224    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

could  do  well  in  the  event  of  war.  Secretary  Alger  happened 
to  be  Secretary  when  war  broke  out,  and  all  the  responsi 
bility  for  the  shortcomings  of  the  Department  were  visited 
upon  his  devoted  head.  He  was  made  the  scapegoat  for  our 
National  shortcomings.  The  fault  was  not  his;  the  fault 
and  responsibility  lay  with  us,  the  people,  who  for  thirty- 
three  years  had  permitted  our  representatives  in  Congress 
and  in  National  executive  office  to  bear  themselves  so  that 
it  was  absolutely  impossible  to  avoid  the  great  bulk  of  all 
the  trouble  that  occurred,  and  of  all  the  shortcomings  of 
which  our  people  complained,  during  the  Spanish  War.  The 
chief  immediate  cause  was  the  condition  of  red-tape  bureau 
cracy  which  existed  in  the  War  Department  at  Washington, 
which  had  prevented  any  good  organization  or  the  prepara 
tion  of  any  good  plan  of  operation  for  using  our  men  and 
supplies.  The  recurrence  of  these  conditions,  even  though 
in  somewhat  less  aggravated  form,  in  any  future  emergency 
is  as  certain  as  sunrise  unless  we  bring  about  the  principle 
of  a  four  years '  detail  in  the  staff  corps — a  principle  which 
Congress  has  now  for  years  stubbornly  refused  to  grant. 

There  are  nations  who  only  need  to  have  peaceful  ideals 
inculcated,  and  to  whom  militarism  is  a  curse  and  a  mis 
fortune.  There  are  other  nations,  like  our  own,  so  happily 
situated  that  the  thought  of  war  is  never  present  to  their 
minds.  They  are  wholly  free  from  any  tendency  im 
properly  to  exalt  or  to  practice  militarism.  These  nations 
should  never  forget  that  there  must  be  military  ideals  no 
less  than  peaceful  ideals.  The  exaltation  of  Nogi's  career, 
set  forth  so  strikingly  in  Stanley  Washburn's  little  volume 
on  the  great  Japanese  warrior,  contains  much  that  is  espe 
cially  needed  for  us  of  America,  prone  as  we  are  to  regard 
the  exigencies  of  a  purely  commercial  and  industrial  civili 
zation  as  excusing  us  from  the  need  of  admiring  and  prac 
ticing  the  heroic  and  warlike  virtues. 

Our  people  are  not  military.  We  need  normally  only  a 
small  standing  army;  bnt  there  should  be  behind  it  a  re 
serve  of  instructed  men  big  enough  to  fill  it  up  to  full  war 
strength,  which  is  over  twice  the  peace  strength.  Moreover, 


THE   WAR   OF   AMEBICA   THE   UNKEADY        225 

the  young  men  of  the  country  should  realize  that  it  is  the 
duty  of  every  one  of  them  to  prepare  himself  so  that  in  time 
of  need  he  may  speedily  become  an  efficient  soldier — a  duty 
now  generally  forgotten,  but  which  should  be  recognized 
as  one  of  the  vitally  essential  parts  of  every  man's  training. 

In  endeavoring  to  get  the  "Kough  Eiders"  equipped  I 
met  with  some  experiences  which  were  both  odd  and  in 
structive.  There  were  not  enough  arms  and  other  neces 
saries  to  go  round,  and  there  was  keen  rivalry  among  the 
intelligent  and  zealous  commanders  of  the  volunteer  organi 
zations  as  to  who  should  get  first  choice.  Wood 's  experience 
was  what  enabled  us  to  equip  ourselves  in  short  order. 
There  was  another  cavalry  organization  whose  commander 
was  at  the  War  Department  about  this  time,  and  we  had 
been  eying  him  with  much  alertness  as  a  rival.  One  day 
I  asked  him  what  his  plans  were  about  arming  and  drilling 
his  troops,  who  were  of  precisely  the  type  of  our  own  men. 
He  answered  that  he  expected  "to  give  each  of  the  boys 
two  revolvers  and  a  lariat,  and  then  just  turn  them  loose. " 
I  reported  the  conversation  to  Wood,  with  the  remark  that 
we  /might  feel  ourselves  safe  from  rivalry  in  that  quarter ; 
and  safe  we  were. 

In  trying  to  get  the  equipment  I  met  with  checks  and 
rebuffs,  and  in  return  was  the  cause  of  worry  and  concern 
to  various  bureau  chiefs  who  were  unquestionably  estimable 
men  in  their  private  and  domestic  relations,  and  who  doubt 
less  had  been  good  officers  thirty  years  before,  but  who  were 
as  unfit  for  modern  war  as  if  they  were  so  many  smooth 
bores.  One  fine  old  fellow  did  his  best  to  persuade  us  to 
take  black  powder  rifles,  explaining  with  paternal  indul 
gence  that  no  one  yet  really  knew  just  what  smokeless 
powder  might  do,  and  that  there  was  a  good  deal  to  be  said 
in  favor  of  having  smoke  to  conceal  us  from  the  enemy.  I 
saw  this  pleasing  theory  actually  worked  out  in  practice 
later  on,  for  the  National  Guard  regiments  with  us  at  San 
tiago  had  black  powder  muskets,  and  the  regular  artillery 
black  powder  guns,  and  they  really  might  almost  as  well 
have  replaced  these  weapons  by  crossbows  and  mangonels. 


226    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

We  succeeded,  thanks  to  Wood,  in  getting  the  same  cavalry 
carbines  that  were  used  by  the  regulars.  We  were  deter 
mined  to  do  this,  not  only  because  the  weapons  were  good, 
but  because  this  would  in  all  probability  mean  that  we  were 
brigaded  with  the  regular  cavalry,  which  it  was  certain 
would  be  sent  immediately  to  the  front  for  the  fighting. 

There  was  one  worthy  bureau  chief  who  was  continually 
refusing  applications  of  mine  as  irregular.  In  each  case  I 
would  appeal  to  Secretary  Alger — who  helped  me  in  every 
way — and  get  an  order  from  him  countenancing  the  irreg 
ularity.  For  instance,  I  found  out  that  as  we  were  nearer 
the  July  date  than  the  January  date  for  the  issuance  of 
clothing,  and  as  it  had  long  been  customary  to  issue  the 
winter  clothing  in  July,  so  as  to  give  ample  leisure  for 
getting  it  to  all  the  various  posts,  it  was  therefore  solemnly 
proposed  to  issue  this  same  winter  clothing  to  us  who  were 
about  to  start  for  a  summer  campaign  in  the  tropics.  This 
would  seem  incredible  to  those  who  have  never  dealt  with 
an  inert  officialdom,  a  red-tape  bureaucracy,  but  such  is  the 
fact.  I  rectified  this  and  got  an  order  for  khaki  clothing. 
We  were  then  told  we  would  have  to  advertise  thirty  days 
for  horses.  This  meant  that  we  would  have  missed  the 
Santiago  expedition.  So  I  made  another  successful  appeal 
to  the  Secretary.  Other  difficulties  came  up  about  wagons, 
and  various  articles,  and  in  each  case  the  same  result  fol 
lowed.  On  the  last  occasion,  when  I  came  up  In  triumph 
with  the  needed  order,  the  worried  office  head,  who  bore  me 
no  animosity,  but  who  did  feel  that  fate  had  been  very  un 
kind,  threw  himself  back  in  his  chair  and  exclaimed  with  a 
sigh:  "Oh,  dear!  I  had  this  office  running  in  such  good 
shape — and  then  along  came  the  war  and  upset  every 
thing!"  His  feeling  was  that  war  was  an  illegitimate  in 
terruption  to  the  work  of  the  War  Department. 

There  were  of  course  department  heads  and  bureau  chiefs 
and  assistants  who,  in  spite  of  the  worthlessness  of  the  sys 
tem,  and  of  the  paralyzing  conditions  that  had  prevailed,  re 
mained  first-class  men.  An  example  of  these  was  Commis 
sary-General  Weston.  His  energy,  activity,  administrative 


THE    WAR   OF    AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        227 

efficiency,  and  common  sense  were  supplemented  by  an 
eager  desire  to  help  everybody  do  the  best  that  could  be 
done.  Both  in  Washington  and  again  down  at  Santiago 
we  owed  him  very  much.  When  I  was  President,  it  was  my 
good  fortune  to  repay  him  in  part  our  debt,  which  means 
the  debt  of  the  people  of  the  country,  by  making  him  a 
major-general. 

The  regiment  assembled  at  San  Antonio.  When  I  reached 
there,  the  men,  rifles,  and  horses,  which  were  the  essentials, 
were  coming  in  fast,  and  the  saddles,  blankets,  and  the  like 
were  also  accumulating.  Thanks  to  Wood's  exertions, 
when  we  reached  Tampa  we  were  rather  better  equipped 
than  most  of  the  regular  regiments.  We  adhered  strictly  to 
field  equipment,  allowing  no  luxuries  or  anything  else  un 
necessary,  and  so  we  were  able  to  move  off  the  field  when 
ordered,  with  our  own  transportation,  leaving  nothing  be 
hind. 

I  suppose  every  man  tends  to  brag  about  his  regiment; 
but  it  does  seem  to  me  that  there  never  was  a  regiment 
better  worth  bragging  about  than  ours.  Wood  was  an  ex 
ceptional  commander,  of  great  power,  with  a  remarkable 
gift  for  organization.  The  rank  and  file  were  as  fine  natural 
fighting  men  as  ever  carried  a  rifle  or  rode  a  horse  in  any 
country  or  any  age.  We  had  a  number  of  first-class  young 
fellows  from  the  East,  most  of  them  from  colleges  like  Har 
vard,  Yale,  and  Princeton;  but  the  great  majority  of  the 
men  wTere  Southwesterners,  from  the  then  territories  of 
Oklahoma,  Indian  Territory,  Arizona,  and  New  Mexico. 
They  were  accustomed  to  the  use  of  firearms,  accustomed 
to  taking  care  of  themselves  in  the  open ;  they  were  intelli 
gent  and  self-reliant;  they  possessed  hardihood  and  en 
durance  and  physical  prowess;  and,  above  all,  they  had 
the  fighting  edge,  the  cool  and  resolute  fighting  temper. 
They  went  into  the  war  with  full  knowledge,  having  deliber 
ately  counted  the  cost.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases  each 
man  was  chiefly  anxious  to  find  out  what  he  should  do  to 
make  the  regiment  a  success.  They  bought,  first  and  last, 
about  800  copies  of  the  cavalry  drill  regulations  and  studied 


228    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

them  industriously.  Such  men  were  practically  soldiery  to 
start  with,  in  all  the  essentials.  It  is  small  wonder  that 
with  them  as  material  to  work  upon  the  regiment  >7as 
raised,  armed,  equipped,  drilled,  sent  on  trains  to  Tampa, 
embarked,  disembarked,  and  put  through  two  victorious 
offensive — not  defensive — fights  in  which  a  third  of  the 
officers  and  one-fifth  of  the  men  were  killed  or  woundedy  all 
within  sixty  days.  It  is  a  good  record,  and  it  speaks 
well  for  the  men  of  the  regiment;  and  it  speaks  well  for 
Wood.1 

Wood  was  so  busy  getting  the  regiment  ready  that  when  I 
reached  San  Antonio  he  turned  most  of  the  drilling  of  it  over 
to  me.  This  was  a  piece  of  great  good  fortune  for  me,  and 
I  drilled  the  men  industriously,  mounted  and  unmounted. 
I  had  plenty  to  learn,  and  the  men  and  the  officers  even 
more ;  but  we  went  at  our  work  with  the  heartiest  good  will. 
We  speedily  made  it  evident  that  there  was  no  room  and  no 
mercy  for  any  man  who  shirked  any  duty,  and  we  accom 
plished  good  results.  The  fact  is  that  the  essentials  of  drill 
and  work  for  a  cavalry  or  an  infantry  regiment  are  easy  to 
learn,  which  of  course  is  not  true  for  the  artillery  or  the  en 
gineers  or  for  the  navy.  The  reason  why  it  takes  so  long  to 
turn  the  average  civilized  man  into  a  good  infantryman  or 
cavalryman  is  because  it  takes  a  long  while  to  teach  the 
average  untrained  man  how  to  shoot,  to  ride,  to  march,  to 
take  care  of  himself  in  the  open,  to  be  alert,  resourceful, 
cool,  daring,  and  resolute,  to  obey  quickly,  as  well  as  to  be 

i  To  counterbalance  the  newspapers  which  ignorantly  and  indiscriminately 
praised  all  the  volunteers  there  were  others  whose  blame  was  of  the  same 
intelligent  quality.  The  New  York  Evening  Post,  on  June  18,  gave  expression 
to  the  following  gloomy  foreboding:  "Competent  observers  have  remarked 
that  nothing  more  extraordinary  has  been  done  than  the  sending  to  Cuba  of 
the  First  United  States  Volunteer  Cavalry,  known  as  the  'rough  riders.'  Or 
ganized  but  four  weeks,  barely  given  their  full  complement  of  officers,  and 
only  a  week  of  regular  drill,  these  men  have  been  sent  to  the  front  before  they 
have  learned  the  first  elements  of  soldiering  and  discipline,  or  have  even  become 
acquainted  with  their  officers.  In  addition  to  all  this,  like  the  regular  cavalry, 
they  have  been  sent  with  only  their  carbines  and  revolvers  to  meet  an  enemy 
armed  with  long-range  rifles.  There  have  been  few  cases  of  such  military 
cruelty  in  our  military  annals."  A  week  or  so  after  this  not  wholly  happy 
prophecy  was  promulgated,  the  "cruelty"  was  consummated,  first  at  Las 
Guasimas  and  then  in  the  San  Juan  fighting. 


THE    WAR   OF    AMERICA    THE    UNREADY        229 

willing,  and  to  fit  himself,  to  act  on  his  own  responsibility. 
If  he  already  possesses  these  qualities,  there  is  very  little 
difficulty  in  making  him  a  soldier ;  all  the  drill  that  is  neces 
sary  to  enable  him  to  march  and  to  fight  is  of  a  simple  char 
acter.  Parade  ground  and  barrack  square  maneuvers  are  of 
no  earthly  consequence  in  real  war.  When  men  can  readily 
change  from  line  to  column,  and  column  to  line,  can  form 
front  in  any  direction,  and  assemble  and  scatter,  and  can  do 
these  things  with  speed  and  precision,  they  have  a  fairly 
good  grasp  of  the  essentials.  When  our  regiment  reached 
Tampa  it  could  already  be  handled  creditably  at  fast  gaits, 
and  both  in  mass  and  extended  formations,  mounted  and 
dismounted. 

I  had  served  three  years  in  the  New  York  National  Guard, 
finally  becoming  a  captain.  This  experience  was  invaluable 
to  me.  It  enabled  me  at  once  to  train  the  men  in  the  simple 
drill  without  which  they  would  have  been  a  mob;  for  al 
though  the  drill  requirements  are  simple,  they  are  also 
absolutely  indispensable.  But  if  I  had  believed  that  my 
experience  in  the  National  Guard  had  taught  me  all  that 
there  was  to  teach  about  a  soldier's  career,  it  would  have 
been  better  for  me  not  to  have  been  in  it  at  all.  There  were 
in  the  regiment  a  number  of  men  who  had  served  in  the 
National  Guard,  and  a  number  of  others  who  had  served  in 
the  Kegular  Army.  Some  of  these  latter  had  served  in  the 
field  in  the  West  under  campaign  conditions,  and  were  ac 
customed  to  long  marches,  privation,  risk,  and  unexpected 
emergencies.  These  men  were  of  the  utmost  benefit  to  the 
regiment.  They  already  knew  their  profession,  and  could 
teach  and  help  the  others.  But  if  the  man  had  merely  served 
in  a  National  Guard  regiment,  or  in  the  Regular  Army  at 
some  post  in  a  civilized  country  where  he  learned  nothing 
except  what  could  be  picked  up  on  the  parade  ground,  in  the 
barracks,  and  in  practice  marches  of  a  few  miles  along  good 
roads,  then  it  depended  purely  upon  his  own  good  sense 
whether  he  had  been  helped  or  hurt  by  the  experience.  If 
he  realized  that  he  had  learned  only  five  per  cent  of  his  pro 
fession,  that  there  remained  ninety-five  per  cent  to  accoin- 


230    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

plish  before  he  would  be  a  good  soldier,  why,  he  had  prof 
ited  immensely. 

To  start  with  five  per  cent  handicap  was  a  very  great 
advantage ;  and  if  the  man  was  really  a  good  man,  he  could 
not  be  overtaken.  But  if  the  man  thought  that  he  had 
learned  all  about  the  profession  of  a  soldier  because  he  had 
been  in  the  National  Guard  or  in  the  Regular  Army  under 
the  conditions  I  have  described,  then  he  was  actually  of  less 
use  than  if  he  had  never  had  any  military  experience  at  all. 
Such  a  man  was  apt  to  think  that  nicety  of  alignment,  pre 
cision  in  wheeling,  and  correctness  in  the  manual  of  arms 
were  the  ends  of  training  and  the  guarantees  of  good 
soldiership,  and  that  from  guard  mounting  to  sentry  duty 
everything  in  war  was  to  be  done  in  accordance  with  what 
he  had  learned  in  peace.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  most  of  what 
he  had  learned  was  never  used  at  all,  and  some  of  it  had  to 
be  unlearned.  The  one  thing,  for  instance,  that  a  sentry 
ought  never  to  do  in  an  actual  campaign  is  to  walk  up  and 
down  a  line  where  he  will  be  conspicuous.  His  business  is  to 
lie  down  somewhere  off  a  ridge  crest  where  he  can  see  any 
one  approaching,  but  where  a  man  approaching  cannot  see 
him.  As  for  the  ceremonies,  during  the  really  hard  part 
of  a  campaign  only  the  barest  essentials  are  kept. 

Almost  all  of  the  junior  regular  officers,  and  many  of 
the  senior  regular  officers,  were  fine  men.  But,  through  no 
fault  of  their  own,  had  been  forced  to  lead  lives  that  fairly 
paralyzed  their  efficiency  when  the  strain  of  modern  war 
came  on  them.  The  routine  elderly  regular  officer  who 
knew  nothing  whatever  of  modern  war  was  in  most  respects 
nearly  as  worthless  as  a  raw  recruit.  The  positions  and 
commands  prescribed  in  the  text-books  were  made  into 
fetishes  by  some  of  these  men,  and  treated  as  if  they  were 
the  ends,  instead  the  not  always  important  means  by  which 
the  ends  were  to  be  achieved.  In  the  Cuban  fighting,  for  in 
stance,  it  would  have  been  folly  for  me  to  have  taken  my 
place  in  the  rear  of  the  regiment,  the  canonical  text-book 
position.  My  business  was  to  be  where  I  could  keep  most 
command  over  the  regiment,  and,  in  a  rough-and-tumble, 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE   UNREADY        231 

scrambling  fight  in  thick  jungle,  this  had  to  depend  upon  the 
course  of  events,  and  usually  meant  that  I  had  to  be  at  the 
front.  I  saw  in  that  fighting  more  than  one  elderly  regi 
mental  commander  who  unwittingly  rendered  the  only  serv 
ice  he  could  render  to  his  regiment  by  taking  up  his  proper 
position  several  hundred  yards  in  the  rear  when  the  fighting 
began ;  for  then  the  regiment  disappeared  in  the  jungle,  and 
for  its  good  fortune  the  commanding  officer  never  saw  it 
again  until  long  after  the  fight  was  over. 

After  one  Cuban  fight  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  regulars 
in  command  of  a  regiment,  who  had  met  with  just  such  an 
experience  and  had  rejoined  us  at  the  front  several  hours 
after  the  close  of  the  fighting,  asked  me  what  my  men  were 
doing  when  the  fight  began.  I  answered  that  they  were 
following  in  trace  in  column  of  twos,  and  that  the  instant 
the  shooting  began  I  deployed  them  as  skirmishers  on  both 
sides  of  the  trail.  He  answered  triumphantly,  "You  can't 
deploy  men  as  skirmishers  from  column  formation";  to 
which  I  responded,  "Well,  I  did,  and,  what  is  more,  if  any 
captain  had  made  any  difficulty  about  it,  I  would  have  sent 
him  to  the  rear."  My  critic  was  quite  correct  from  the 
parade  ground  standpoint.  The  prescribed  orders  at  that 
time  were  to  deploy  the  column  first  into  a  line  of  squads 
at  correct  intervals,  and  then  to  give  an  order  which,  if 
my  memory  serves  correctly,  ran:  "As  skirmishers,  by  the 
right  and  left  flanks,  at  six  yards,  take  intervals,  march." 
The  order  I  really  gave  ran  more  like  this :  4  *  Scatter  out  to 
the  right  there,  quick,  you!  scatter  to  the  left;  look  alive, 
look  alive!"  And  they  looked  alive,  and  they  scattered, 
and  each  took  advantage  of  cover,  and  forward  went  the 
line. 

Now  I  do  not  wish  what  I  have  said  to  be  misunderstood. 
If  ever  we  have  a  great  war,  the  bulk  of  our  soldiers  will 
not  be  men  who  have  had  any  opportunity  to  train  soul  and 
mind  and  body  so  as  to  meet  the  iron  needs  of  an  actual 
campaign.  Long  continued  and  faithful  drill  will  alone  put 
these  men  in  shape  to  begin  to  do  their  duty,  and  failure  to 
recognize  this  on  the  part  of  the  average  man  will  mean 


232    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

laziness  and  folly  and  not  the  possession  of  efficiency.  More 
over,  if  men  have  been  trained  to  believe,  for  instance,  that 
they  can  "  arbitrate  questions  of  vital  interest  and  national 
honor,"  if  they  have  been  brought  up  with  flabbiness  of 
moral  fiber  as  well  as  flabbiness  of  physique,  then  there  will 
be  need  of  long  and  laborious  and  faithful  work  to  give  the 
needed  tone  to  mind  and  body.  But  if  the  men  have  in  them 
the  right  stuff,  it  is  not  so  very  difficult. 

At  San  Antonio  we  entrained  for  Tampa.  In  vari 
ous  sociological  books  by  authors  of  Continental  Europe 
there  are  jeremiads  as  to  the  way  in  which  service  in  the 
great  European  armies,  with  their  minute  and  machine-like 
efficiency  and  regularity  tends  to  dwarf  the  capacity  for 
individual  initiative  among  the  officers  and  men.  There 
is  no  such  danger  for  any  officer  or  man  of  a  volunteer 
organization  in  America  when  our  country,  with  playful 
light-heartedness,  has  pranced  into  war  without  making 
any  preparation  for  it.  I  know  no  larger  or  finer  field  for 
the  display  of  an  advanced  individualism  than  that  which 
opened  before  us  as  we  went  from  San  Antonio  to  Tampa, 
camped  there  and  embarked  on  a  transport  for  Cuba.  No 
body  ever  had  any  definite  information  to  give  us,  and 
whatever  information  we  unearthed  on  our  own  account 
was  usually  wrong.  Each  of  us  had  to  show  an  alert  and 
not  overscrupulous  self-reliance  in  order  to  obtain  food  for 
his  men,  provender  for  his  horses,  or  transportation  of  any 
kind  for  any  object.  One  lesson  early  impressed  on  me  was 
that  if  I  wanted  anything  to  eat  it  was  wise  to  carry  it  with 
me ;  and  if  any  new  war  should  arise,  I  would  earnestly  ad 
vise  the  men  of  every  volunteer  organization  always  to 
proceed  upon  the  belief  that  their  supplies  will  not  turn  up, 
and  to  take  every  opportunity  of  getting  food  for  them 
selves. 

Tampa  was  a  scene  of  the  wildest  confusion.  There  were 
miles  of  tracks  loaded  with  cars  of  the  contents  of  which 
nobody  seemed  to  have  any  definite  knowledge.  General 
Miles,  who  was  supposed  to  have  supervision  over  every 
thing,  and  General  Sh after,  who  had  charge  of  the  expedi- 


THE    WAR   OF    AMERICA    THE    UNREADY        233 

tion,  were  both  there.  But,  thanks  to  the  fact  that  nobody 
had  had  any  experience  in  handling  even  such  a  small  force 
as  ours — about  17,000  men — there  was  no  semblance  of 
order.  "Wood  and  I  were  bound  that  we  should  not  be  left 
behind  when  the  expedition  started.  When  we  were  finally 
informed  that  it  was  to  leave  next  morning,  we  were  ordered 
to  go  to  a  certain  track  to  meet  a  train.  We  went  to  the 
track,  but  the  train  never  came.  Then  we  were  sent  to  an 
other  track  to  meet  another  train.  Again  it  never  came. 
However,  we  found  a  coal  train,  of  which  we  took  posses 
sion,  and  the  conductor,  partly  under  duress  and  partly 
in  a  spirit  of  friendly  helpfulness,  took  us  down  to  the 
quay. 

All  kinds  of  other  organizations,  infantry  and  cavalry, 
regular  and  volunteer,  were  arriving  at  the  quay  and  wan 
dering  around  it,  and  there  was  no  place  where  we  could  get 
any  specific  information  as  to  what  transport  we  were  to 
have.  Finally  Wood  was  told  to  "get  any  ship  you  can  get 
w^hich  is  not  already  assigned. ' '  He  borrowed  without  leave 
a  small  motor  boat,  and  commandeered  the  transport  Yuca 
tan.  When  asked  by  the  captain  what  his  authority  was, 
he  reported  that  he  was  acting  "by  orders  of  General 
Shafter,"  and  directed  the  ship  to  be  brought  to  the  dock. 
He  had  already  sent  me  word  to  be  ready,  as  soon  as  the 
ship  touched  the  pier,  to  put  the  regiment  aboard  her.  I 
found  that  she  had  already  been  assigned  to  a  regular  regi 
ment,  and  to  another  volunteer  regiment,  and  as  it  was 
evident  that  not  more  than  half  of  the  men  assigned  to  her 
could  possibly  get  on,  I  was  determined  that  we  should  not 
be  among  the  men  left  off.  The  volunteer  regiment  offered 
a  comparatively  easy  problem.  I  simply  marched  my  men 
past  them  to  the  allotted  place  and  held  the  gangway.  With 
the  regulars  I  had  to  be  a  little  more  diplomatic,  because 
their  commander,  a  lieutenant-colonel,  was  my  superior  in 
rank,  and  also  doubtless  knew  his  rights.  He  sent  word  to 
me  to  make  way,  to  draw  my  regiment  off  to  one  side,  and 
let  his  take  possession  of  the  gangway.  I  could  see  the 
transport  coining  in,  and  could  dimly  make  out  Wood's 


234    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

figure  thereon.  Accordingly  I  played  for  time.  I  sent  re 
spectful  requests  through  his  officers  to  the  commander  of 
the  regulars,  entered  into  parleys,  and  made  protestations, 
until  the  transport  got  near  enough  so  that  by  yelling  at  the 
top  of  my  voice  I  was  able  to  get  into  a — highly  construc 
tive — communication  with  Wood.  What  he  was  saying  I 
had  no  idea,  but  he  was  evidently  speaking,  and  on  my  own 
responsibility  I  translated  it  into  directions  to  hold  the 
gangway,  and  so  informed  the  regulars  that  I  was  under 
the  orders  of  my  superior  and  of  a  ranking  officer — to  my 
great  regret,  etc.,  etc. — could  not  give  way  as  they  desired. 
As  soon  as  the  transport  was  fast  we  put  our  men  aboard 
at  the  double.  Half  of  the  regular  regiment  got  on,  and  the 
other  half  and  the  other  volunteer  regiment  went  some 
where  else. 

We  were  kept  several  days  on  the  transport,  which  was 
jammed  with  men,  so  that  it  was  hard  to  move  about  on  the 
deck.  Then  the  fleet  got  under  way,  and  we  steamed  slowly 
down  to  Santiago.  Here  we  disembarked,  higgledy-pig 
gledy,  just  as  we  had  embarked.  Different  parts  of  dif 
ferent  outfits  were  jumbled  together,  and  it  was  no  light 
labor  afterwards  to  assemble  the  various  batteries.  For 
instance,  one  transport  had  guns,  and  another  the  locks  for 
the  guns ;  the  two  not  getting  together  for  several  days  after 
one  of  them  had  been  landed.  Soldiers  went  here,  pro 
visions  there;  and  who  got  ashore  first  largely  depended 
upon  individual  activity.  Fortunately  for  us,  my  former 
naval  aide,  when  I  had  been  Assistant  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  Lieutenant-Commander  Sharp,  a  first-class  fellow, 
was  there  in  command  of  a  little  ship  to  which  I  had  suc 
ceeded  in  getting  him  appointed  before  I  left  the  Navy  De 
partment.  He  gave  us  a  black  pilot,  who  took  our  transport 
right  in  shore,  the  others  following  like  a  flock  of  sheep ;  and 
we  disembarked  with  our  rifles,  ammunition  belts,  and  not 
much  else.  In  theory  it  was  out  of  our  turn,  but  if  we  had 
not  disembarked  then,  Heaven  only  knows  when  our  turn 
would  have  come,  and  we  did  not  intend  to  be  out  of  the 
fighting  if  we  could  help  it.  I  carried  some  food  in  my 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        235 

pockets,  and  a  light  waterproof  coat,  which  was  my  sole 
camp  equipment  for  the  next  two  or  three  days.  Twenty- 
four  hours  after  getting  ashore  we  inarched  from  Daiquiri, 
where  we  had  landed,  to  Siboney,  also  on  the  coast,  reaching 
it  during  a  terrific  downpour  of  rain.  When  this  was  over, 
we  built  a  fire,  dried  our  clothes,  and  ate  whatever  we  had 
brought  with  us. 

We  were  brigaded  with  the  First  and  Tenth  Kegular 
Cavalry,  under  Brigadier-General  Sam  Young.  He  was  a 
fine  type  of  the  American  regular.  Like  General  Chaffee, 
another  of  the  same  type,  he  had  entered  the  army  in  the 
Civil  War  as  a  private.  Later,  when  I  was  President,  it 
was  my  good  fortune  to  make  each  of  them  in  succession 
Lieutenant-General  of  the  army  of  the  United  States.  When 
General  Y7oung  retired  and  General  Chaff  ee  was  to  take  his 
place,  the  former  sent  to  the  latter  his  three  stars  to  wear 
on  his  first  official  presentation,  with  a  note  that  they  were 
from  "Private  Young  to  Private  Chaff  ee."  The  two  fine 
old  fellows  had  served  in  the  ranks,  one  in  the  cavalry,  one 
in  the  infantry,  in  their  golden  youth,  in  the  days  of  the 
great  war  nearly  half  a  century  before;  each  had  grown 
gray  in  a  lifetime  of  honorable  service  under  the  flag,  and 
each  closed  his  active  career  in  command  of  the  army.  Gen 
eral  Young  was  one  of  the  few  men  who  had  given  and  taken 
wounds  with  the  saber.  He  was  an  old  friend  of  mine,  and 
when  in  Washington  before  starting  for  the  front  he  told 
me  that  if  we  got  in  his  brigade  he  would  put  us  into  the 
fighting  all  right.  He  kept  his  word. 

General  Young  had  actively  superintended  getting  his 
two  regular  regiments,  or  at  least  a  squadron  of  each,  off 
the  transports,  and  late  that  night  he  sent  us  word  that  he 
had  received  permission  to  move  at  dawn  and  strike  the 
Spanish  advance  position.  He  directed  us  to  move  along 
a  ridge  trail  with  our  two  squadrons  (one  squadron  having 
been  left  at  Tampa),  while  with  the  two  squadrons  of  reg 
ulars,  one  of  the  First  and  one  of  the  Tenth,  under  his  per 
sonal  supervision,  he  marched  up  the  valley  trail.  Accord 
ingly  Wood  took  us  along  the  hill  trail  early  next  morning, 


236    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

till  we  struck  the  Spaniards,  and  began  our  fight  just  as  the 
regulars  began  the  fight  in  the  valley  trail. 

It  was  a  mountainous  country  covered  with  thick  jungle, 
a  most  confusing  country,  and  I  had  an  awful  time  trying 
to  get  into  the  fight  and  trying  to  do  what  was  right  when 
in  it ;  and  all  the  while  I  was  thinking  that  I  was  the  only 
man  who  did  not  know  what  I  was  about,  and  that  all  the 
others  did — whereas,  as  I  found  out  later,  pretty  much 
everybody  else  was  as  much  in  the  dark  as  I  was.  There 
was  no  surprise ;  we  struck  the  Spaniards  exactly  where  we 
had  expected;  then  Wood  halted  us  and  put  us  into  the 
fight  deliberately  and  in  order.  He  ordered  us  to  deploy 
alternately  by  troops  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  trail,  giv 
ing  our  senior  major,  Brodie,  a  West  Pointer  and  as  good 
a  soldier  as  ever  wore  a  uniform,  the  left  wing,  while  I  took 
the  right  wing.  I  was  told  if  possible  to  connect  with  the 
regulars  who  were  on  the  right.  In  theory  this  was  excel 
lent,  but  as  the  jungle  was  very  dense  the  first  troop  that 
deployed  to  the  right  vanished  forthwith,  and  I  never  saw 
it  again  until  the  fight  was  over — having  a  frightful  feeling 
meanwhile  that  I  might  be  court-martialed  for  losing  it. 
The  next  troop  deployed  to  the  left  under  Brodie.  Then 
the  third  came  along,  and  I  started  to  deploy  it  to  the  right 
as  before. 

By  the  time  the  first  platoon  had  gotten  into  the  jungle 
I  realized  that  it  likewise  would  disappear  unless  I  kept 
hold  of  it.  I  managed  to  keep  possession  of  the  last  platoon. 
One  learns  fast  in  a  fight,  and  I  marched  this  platoon  and 
my  next  two  troops  in  column  through  the  jungle  without 
any  attempt  to  deploy  until  we  got  on  the  firing  line.  This 
sounds  simple.  But  it  was  not.  I  did  not  know  when  I 
had  gotten  on  the  firing  line!  I  could  hear  a  good  deal  of 
firing,  some  over  to  my  right  at  a  good  distance,  and  the 
rest  to  the  left  and  ahead.  I  pushed  on,  expecting  to  strike 
the  enemy  somewhere  between. 

Soon  we  came  to  the  brink  of  a  deep  valley.  There  was  a 
good  deal  of  cracking  of  rifles  way  off  in  front  of  us,  but  as 
they  used  smokeless  powder  we  had  no  idea  as  to  exactly 


THE    WAR    OF    AMERICA    THE    UNREADY        237 

where  they  were,  or  who  they  were  shooting  at.  Then  it 
dawned  on  us  that  we  were  the  target.  The  bullets  began 
to  come  overhead,  making  a  sound  like  the  ripping  of  a  silk 
dress,  with  sometimes  a  kind  of  pop ;  a  few  of  my  men  fell, 
and  I  deployed  the  rest,  making  them  lie  down  and  get 
behind  trees.  Richard  Harding  Davis  was  with  us,  and  as 
we  scanned  the  landscape  with  our  glasses  it  was  he  who 
first  pointed  out  to  us  some  Spaniards  in  a  trench  some 
three-quarters  of  a  mile  off.  It  was  difficult  to  make  them 
out.  There  were  not  many  of  them.  However,  we  finally 
did  make  them  out,  and  we  could  see  their  conical  hats,  for 
the  trench  was  a  poor  one.  We  advanced,  firing  at  them, 
and  drove  them  off. 

What  to  do  then  I  had  not  an  idea.  The  country  in  front 
fell  away  into  a  very  difficult  jungle-filled  valley.  There 
was  nothing  but  jungle  all  around,  and  if  I  advanced  I  was 
afraid  I  might  get  out  of  touch  with  everybody  and  not  be 
going  in  the  right  direction.  Moreover,  as  far  as  I  could 
see,  there  was  now  nobody  in  front  who  was  shooting  at  us, 
although  some  of  the  men  on  my  left  insisted  that  our  own 
men  had  fired  into  us — an  allegation  which  I  soon  found 
was  almost  always  made  in  such  a  fight,  and  which  in  this 
case  was  not  true.  At  this  moment  some  of  the  regulars 
appeared  across  the  ravine  on  our  right.  The  first  thing 
they  did  was  to  fire  a  volley  at  us,  but  one  of  our  first  ser 
geants  went  up  a  tree  and  waved  a  guidon  at  them  and  they 
stopped.  Firing  was  still  going  on  to  our  left,  however, 
and  I  was  never  more  puzzled  to  know  what  to  do.  I  did 
not  wish  to  take  my  men  out  of  their  position  without 
orders,  for  fear  that  I  might  thereby  be  leaving  a  gap  if 
there  wTas  a  Spanish  force  which  meditated  an  offensive  re 
turn.  On  the  other  hand,  it  did  not  seem  to  me  that  I  had 
been  doing  enough  fighting  to  justify  my  existence,  and 
there  was  obviously  fighting  going  on  to  the  left.  I  re 
member  that  I  kept  thinking  of  the  refrain  of  the  fox-hunt 
ing  song,  "Here's  to  every  friend  who  struggled  to  the 
end" ;  in  the  hunting  field  I  had  always  acted  on  this  theory, 
and,  no  matter  how  discouraging  appearances  might  be, 


238    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

? 

had  never  stopped  trying  to  get  in  at  the  death  until  the 
hunt  was  actually  over ;  and  now  that  there  was  work,  and 
not  play,  on  hand,  ^intended  to  struggle  as  hard  as  I  knew 
how  not  to  be  left  out  of  any  fighting  into  which  I  could, 
with  any  possible  propriety,  get. 

So  I  left  my  men  where  they  were  and  started  off  at  a 
trot  toward  where  the  firing  was,  with  a  couple  of  orderlies 
to  send  back  for  the  men  in  case  that  proved  advisable. 
Like  most  tyros,  I  was  wearing  my  sword,  which  in  thick 
jungle  now  and  then  got  between  my  legs — from  that  day 
on  it  always  went  corded  in  the  baggage.  I  struck  the  trail, 
and  began  to  pass  occasional  dead  men.  Pretty  soon  I 
reached  Wood  and  found,  much  to  my  pleasure,  that  I  had 
done  the  right  thing,  for  as  I  came  up  word  was  brought 
to  him  that  Brodie  had  been  shot,  and  he  at  once  sent  me 
to  take  charge  of  the  left  wing.  It  was  more  open  country 
here,  and  at  least  I  was  able  to  get  a  glimpse  of  my  own 
men  and  exercise  some  control  over  them.  There  was  much 
firing  going  on,  but  for  the  life  of  me  I  could  not  see  any 
Spaniards,  and  neither  could  any  one  else.  Finally  we 
made  up  our  minds  that  they  were  shooting  at  us  from  a 
set  of  red-tiled  ranch  buildings  a  good  way  in  front,  and 
these  I  assaulted,  finally  charging  them.  Before  we  came 
anywhere  near,  the  Spaniards,  who,  as  it  proved,  really 
were  inside  and  around  them,  abandoned  them,  leaving  a 
few  dead  men. 

By  the  time  I  had  taken  possession  of  these  buildings  all 
firing  had  ceased  everywhere.  I  had  not  the  faintest  idea 
what  had  happened :  whether  the  fight  was  over ;  or  whether 
this  was  merely  a  lull  in  the  fight ;  or  where  the  Spaniards 
were ;  or  whether  we  might  be  attacked  again ;  or  whether 
we  ought  ourselves  to  attack  somebody  somewhere  else.  I 
got  my  men  in  order  and  sent  out  small  parties  to  explore 
the  ground  in  front,  who  returned  without  finding  any  foe. 
(By  this  time,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Spaniards  were  in 
full  retreat.)  Meanwhile  I  was  extending  my  line  so  as  to 
get  into  touch  with  our  people  on  the  right.  Word  was 
brought  to  me  that  Wood  had  been  shot — which  fortunately 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        239 

proved  not  to  be  true — and  as,  if  this  were  so,  it  meant 
that  I  must  take  charge  of  the  regiment,  I  moved  over  per 
sonally  to  inquire.  Soon  I  learned  that  he  was  all  right, 
that  the  Spaniards  had  retreated  along  the  main  road,  and 
that  Colonel  Wood  and  two  or  three  other  officers  were  a 
short  distance  away.  Before  I  reached  them  I  encountered 
a  captain  of  the  Ninth  Cavalry,  very  glum  because  his 
troopers  had  not  been  up  in  time  to  take  part  in  the  fight, 
and  he  congratulated  me — with  visible  effort! — upon  my 
share  in  our  first  victory.  I  thanked  him  cordially,  not 
confiding  to  him  that  till  that  moment  I  myself  knew  ex 
ceeding  little  about  the  victory;  and  proceeded  to  where 
Generals  Wheeler,  Lawton,  and  Chaffee,  who  had  just  come 
up,  in  company  with  Wood,  were  seated  on  a  bank.  They 
expressed  appreciation  of  the  way  that  I  had  handled  my 
troops,  first  on  the  right  wing  and  then  on  the  left !  As  I 
was  quite  prepared  to  find  I  had  committed  some  awful  sin, 
I  did  my  best  to  accept  this  in  a  nonchalant  manner,  and 
not  to  look  as  relieved  as  I  felt.  As  throughout  the  morn 
ing  I  had  preserved  a  specious  aspect  of  wisdom,  and  had 
commanded  first  one  and  then  the  other  wing,  the  fight  was 
really  a  capital  thing  for  me,  for  practically  all  the  men 
had  served  under  my  actual  command,  and  thenceforth  felt 
an  enthusiastic  belief  that  I  would  lead  them  aright. 

It  was  a  week  after  this  skirmish  before  the  army  made 
the  advance  on  Santiago.  Just  before  this  occurred  General 
Young  was  stricken  down  with  fever.  General  Wheeler, 
who  had  commanded  the  Cavalry  Division,  was  put  in  gen 
eral  charge  of  the  left' wing  of  the  army,  which  fought  be 
fore  the  city  itself.  Brigadier-General  Sam  Sumner,  an  ex 
cellent  officer,  who  had  the  second  cavalry  brigade,  took 
command  of  the  cavalry  division,  and  Wood  took  command 
of  our  brigade,  while,  to  my  intense  delight,  I  got  my  regi 
ment.  I  therefore  had  command  of  the  regiment  before  the 
stiffest  fighting  occurred.  Later,  when  Wood  was  put  in 
command  in  Santiago,  I  became  the  brigade  commander. 

Late  in  the  evening  we  camped  at  El  Poso.  There  were 
two  regular  officers,  the  brigade  commander's  aides,  Lieu- 


240    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

tenants  A.  L.  Mills  and  W.  E.  Shipp,  who  were  camped  by 
our  regiment.  Each  of  my  men  had  food  in  his  haversack, 
but  I  had  none,  and  I  would  have  gone  supperless  to  bed  if 
Mills  and  Shipp  had  not  given  me  out  of  their  scanty  stores 
a  big  sandwich,  which  I  shared  with  my  orderly,  who  also 
had  nothing.  Next  morning  my  body  servant  Marshall,  an 
ex-soldier  of  the  Ninth  (Colored)  Cavalry,  a  fine  and  faith 
ful  fellow,  had  turned  up  and  I  was  able  in  my  turn  to  ask 
Mills  and  Shipp,  who  had  eaten  all  their  food  the  preceding 
evening,  to  take  breakfast  with  me.  A  few  hours  later 
gallant  Shipp  was  dead,  and  Mills,  an  exceptionally  able 
officer,  had  been  shot  through  the  head  from  side  to  side, 
just  back  of  the  eyes;  yet  he  lived,  although  one  eye  was 
blinded,  and  before  I  left  the  Presidency  I  gave  him  his 
commission  as  Brigadier-General. 

Early  in  the  morning  our  artillery  began  firing  from  the 
hill-crest  immediately  in  front  of  where  our  men  were 
camped.  Several  of  the  regiment  were  killed  and  wounded 
by  the  shrapnel  of  the  return  fire  of  the  Spaniards.  One 
of  the  shrapnel  bullets  fell  on  my  wrist  and  raised  a  bump 
as  big  as  a  hickory  nut,  but  did  not  even  break  the  skin. 
Then  we  were  marched  down  from  the  hill  on  a  muddy  road 
through  thick  jungle  towards  Santiago.  The  heat  was 
great,  and  we  strolled  into  the  fight  with  no  definite  idea  on 
the  part  of  any  one  as  to  what  we  were  to  do  or  what  would 
happen.  There  was  no  plan  that  our  left  wing  was  to  make 
a  serious  fight  that  day;  and  as  there  were  no  plans,  it 
was  naturally  exceedingly  hard  to  get  orders,  and  each  of 
us  had  to  act  largely  on  his  own  responsibility. 

Lawton's  infantry  division  attacked  the  little  village  of 
El  Caney,  some  miles  to  the  right.  Kent 's  infantry  division 
and  Sunmer's  dismounted  cavalry  division  wTere  supposed 
to  detain  the  Spanish  army  in  Santiago  until  Lawton  had 
captured  El  Caney.  Spanish  towns  and  villages,  however, 
with  their  massive  buildings,  are  natural  fortifications,  as 
the  French  found  in  the  Peninsular  War,  and  as  both  the 
French  and  our  people  found  in  Mexico.  The  Spanish 
troops  in  El  Caney  fought  very  bravely,  as  did  the  Spanish 


THE    WAR    OF    AMERICA    THE    UNREADY        241 

troops  in  front  of  us,  and  it  was  late  in  the  afternoon  before 
Lawton  accomplished  his  task. 

Meanwhile  we  of  the  left  wing  had  by  degrees  become 
involved  in  a  fight  which  toward  the  end  became  not  even 
a  colonel's  fight,  but  a  squad  leader's  fight.  The  cavalry 
division  was  put  at  the  head  of  the  line.  We  were  told  to 
march  forward,  cross  a  little  river  in  front,  and  then,  turn 
ing  to  the  right,  march  up  alongside  the  stream  until  we 
connected  with  Lawton.  Incidentally,  this  movement  would 
not  have  brought  us  into  touch  with  Lawton  in  any  event. 
But  we  speedily  had  to  abandon  any  thought  of  carrying- 
it  out.  The  maneuver  brought  us  within  fair  range  of  the 
Spanish  intrenchments  along  the  line  of  hills  which  we 
called  the  San  Juan  Hills,  because  on  one  of  them  was  the 
San  Juan  blockhouse.  On  that  day  my  regiment  had  the 
lead  of  the  second  brigade,  and  we  marched  down  the  trail 
following  in  trace  behind  the  first  brigade.  Apparently  the 
Spaniards  could  not  make  up  their  minds  what  to  do  as  the 
three  regular  regiments  of  the  first  brigade  crossed  and  de 
filed  along  the  other  bank  of  the  stream,  but  when  our  regi 
ment  was  crossing  they  began  to  fire  at  us. 

Under  this  flank  fire  it  soon  became  impossible  to  con 
tinue  the  march.  The  first  brigade  halted,  deployed,  and 
finally  began  to  fire  back.  Then  our  brigade  was  halted. 
From  time  to  time  some  of  our  men  would  fall,  and  I  sent 
repeated  word  to  the  rear  to  try  to  get  authority  to  attack 
the  hills  in  front.  Finally  General  Sumner,  who  was  fight 
ing  the  division  in  fine  shape,  sent  word  to  advance.  The 
word  was  brought  to  me  by  Mills,  who  said  that  my  orders 
were  to  support  the  regulars  in  the  assault  on  the  hills,  and 
that  my  objective  would  be  the  red-tiled  ranch -house  in 
front,  on  a  hill  which  wre  afterwards  christened  Kettle  Hill. 
I  mention  Mills  saying  this  because  it  was  exactly  the  kind 
of  definite  order  the  giving  of  which  does  so  much  to  insure 
success  in  a  fight,  as  it  prevents  all  obscurity  as  to  what  is 
to  be  done.  The  order  to  attack  did  not  reach  the  first  brig 
ade  until  after  we  ourselves  reached  it,  so  that  at  first  there 


242    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


was  doubt  on  the  part  of  their  officers  whether  they  were  at 
liberty  to  join  in  the  advance. 

I  had  not  enjoyed  the  Guasimas  fight  at  all,  because  I 
had  been  so  uncertain  as  to  what  I  ought  to  do.  But  the 
San  Juan  fight  was  entirely  different.  Spaniards  had  a 
hard  position  to  attack,  it  is  true,  but  we  could  see  them, 
and  I  knew  exactly  how  to  proceed.  I  kept  on  horseback, 
merely  because  I  found  it  difficult  to  convey  orders  along 
the  line,  as  the  men  were  lying  down ;  and  it  is  always  hard 
to  get  men  to  start  when  they  cannot  see  whether  their  com 
rades  are  also  going.  So  I  rode  up  and  down  the  lines,  keep 
ing  them  straightened  out,  and  gradually  worked  through 
line  after  line  until  I  found  myself  at  the  head  of  the  regi 
ment.  By  the  time  I  had  reached  the  lines  of  the  regulars 
of  the  first  brigade  I  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was 
silly  to  stay  in  the  valley  firing  at  the  hills,  because  that  was 
really  where  we  were  most  exposed,  and  that  the  thing  to  do 
was  to  try  to  rush  the  intrenchments.  Where  I  struck  the 
regulars  there  was  no  one  of  superior  rank  to  mine,  and 
after  asking  why  they  did  not  charge,  and  being  answered 
that  they  had  no  orders,  I  said  I  would  give  the  order.  There 
was  naturally  a  little  reluctance  shown  by  the  elderly  officer 
in  command  to  accept  my  order,  so  I  said,  "Then  let  my 
men  through,  sir,"  and  I  marched  through,  followed  by  my 
grinning  men.  The  younger  officers  and  the  enlisted  men 
of  the  regulars  jumped  up  and  joined  us.  I  waved  my  hat, 
and  we  went  up  the  hill  with  a  rush.  Having  taken  it,  we 
looked  across  at  the  Spaniards  in  the  trenches  under  the 
San  Juan  blockhouse  to  our  left,  which  Hawkins's  brigade 
was  assaulting.  I  ordered  our  men  to  open  fire  on  the 
Spaniards  in  the  trenches. 

Memory  plays  funny  tricks  in  such  a  fight,  where  things 
happen  quickly,  and  all  kinds  of  mental  images  succeed 
one  another  in  a  detached  kind  of  way,  while  the  work  goes 
on.  As  I  gave  the  order  in  question  there  slipped  through 
my  mind  Mahan's  account  of  Nelson's  orders  that  each  ship 
as  it  sailed  forward,  if  it  saw  another  ship  engaged  with  an 
enemy's  ship,  should  rake  the  latter  as  it  passed.  When 


THE    WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        243 

Hawkins's  soldiers  captured  the  blockhouse,  I,  very  much 
elated,  ordered  a  charge  on  my  own  hook  to  a  line  of  hills 
still  farther  on.  Hardly  anybody  heard  this  order,  how 
ever;  only  four  men  started  with  me,  three  of  whom  were 
shot.  I  gave  one  of  them,  who  was  only  wounded,  my  can 
teen  of  water,  and  ran  back,  much  irritated  that  I  had  not 
been  followed — which  was  quite  unjustifiable,  because  I 
found  that  nobody  had  heard  my  orders.  General  Sumner 
had  come  up  by  this  time,  and  I  asked  his  permission  to  lead 
the  charge.  He  ordered  me  to  do  so,  and  this  time  away  we 
went,  and  stormed  the  Spanish  intrenchments.  There  was 
some  close  fighting,  and  we  took  a  fewr  prisoners.  We  also 
captured  the  Spanish  provisions,  and  ate  them  that  night 
with  great  relish.  One  of  the  items  was  salted  flying-fish, 
by  the  way.  There  were  also  bottles  of  wine,  and  jugs  of 
fiery  spirit,  and  as  soon  as  possible  I  had  these  broken,  al 
though  not  before  one  or  two  of  my  men  had  taken  too  much 
liquor.  Lieutenant  Howze,  of  the  regulars,  an  aide  of  Gen 
eral  Sumner 's,  brought  me  an  order  to  halt  where  I  was; 
he  could  not  make  up  his  mind  to  return  until  he  had  spent 
an  hour  or  two  with  us  under  fire.  The  Spaniards  at 
tempted  a  counter-attack  in  the  middle  of  the  afternoon, 
but  were  driven  back  without  effort,  our  men  laughing  and 
cheering  as  they  rose  to  fire;  because  hitherto  they  had 
been  assaulting  breastworks,  or  lying  still  under  artillery 
fire,  and  they  were  glad  to  get  a  chance  to  shoot  at  the 
Spaniards  in  the  open.  We  lay  on  our  arms  that  night  and 
as  we  were  drenched  with  sweat,  and  had  no  blankets  save 
a  few  we  took  from  the  dead  Spaniards,  we  found  even  the 
tropic  night  chilly  before  morning  came. 

During  the  afternoon's  fighting,  while  I  was  the  highest 
officer  at  our  immediate  part  of  the  front,  Captains  Bough- 
ton  and  Morton  of  the  regular  cavalry,  two  as  fine  officers  as 
any  man  could  wash  to  have  beside  him  in  battle,  came  along 
the  firing  line  to  tell  me  that  they  had  heard  a  rumor  that 
we  might  fall  back,  and  that  they  wished  to  record  their 
emphatic  protest  against  any  such  course.  I  did  not  believe 
there  was  any  truth  in  the  rumor,  for  the  Spaniards  were 


244    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

utterly  incapable  of  any  effective  counter-attack.  However, 
late  in  the  evening,  after  the  fight,  General  Wheeler  visited 
us  at  the  front,  and  he  told  me  to  keep  myself  in  readiness, 
as  at  any  moment  it  might  be  decided  to  fall  back.  Jack 
Greenway  was  beside  me  when  General  Wheeler  was  speak 
ing.  I  answered,  "Well,  General,  I  really  don't  know 
whether  we  would  obey  an  order  to  fall  back.  We  can  take 
that  city  by  a  rush,  and  if  we  have  to  move  out  of  here  at  all 
I  should  be  inclined  to  make  the  rush  in  the  right  direction. ' ' 
Greenway  nodded  an  eager  assent.  The  old  General,  after 
a  moment's  pause,  expressed  his  hearty  agreement,  and  said 
that  he  would  see  that  there  was  no  falling  back.  He  had 
been  very  sick  for  a  couple  of  days,  but,  sick  as  he  was,  he 
managed  to  get  into  the  fight.  He  was  a  gamecock  if  ever 
there  was  one,  but  he  was  in  very  bad  physical  shape  on 
the  day  of  the  fight.  If  there  had  been  any  one  in  high  com 
mand  to  supervise  and  press  the  attack  that  afternoon,  we 
would  have  gone  right  into  Santiago.  In  my  part  of  the 
line  the  advance  was  halted  only  because  we  received  orders 
not  to  move  forward,  but  to  stay  on  the  crest  of  the  captured 
hill  and  hold  it. 

We  are  always  told  that  three-o 'clock-in- the-morning 
courage  is  the  most  desirable  kind.  Well,  my  men  and  the 
regulars  of  the  cavalry  had  just  that  brand  of  courage.  At 
about  three  o'clock  on  the  morning  after  the  first  fight, 
shooting  began  in  our  front  and  there  was  an  alarm  of  a 
Spanish  advance.  I  was  never  more  pleased  than  to  see 
the  way  in  which  the  hungry,  tired,  shabby  men  all  jumped 
up  and  ran  forward  to  the  hill-crest,  so  as  to  be  ready  for 
the  attack;  which,  however,  did  not  come.  As  soon  as  the 
sun  rose  the  Spaniards  again  opened  upon  us  with  artillery. 
A  shell  burst  between  Dave  Goodrich  and  myself,  blacking 
us  with  powder,  and  killing  and  wounding  several  of  the 
men  immediately  behind  us. 

Next  day  the  fight  turned  into  a  siege ;  there  were  some 
stirring  incidents;  but  for  the  most  part  it  was  trench 
work.  A  fortnight  later  Santiago  surrendered.  Wood  won 
his  brigadier-generalship  by  the  capital  way  in  which  he 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE   UNREADY        245 

handled  his  brigade  in  the  fight,  and  in  the  following  siege. 
He  was  put  in  command  of  the  captured  city ;  and  in  a  few 
days  I  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  brigade. 

The  health  of  the  troops  was  not  good,  and  speedily  be 
came  very  bad.  There  was  some  dysentery,  and  a  little 
yellow  fever;  but  most  of  the  trouble  was  from  a  severe 
form  of  malarial  fever.  The  Washington  authorities  had 
behaved  better  than  those  in  actual  command  of  the  expedi 
tion  at  one  crisis.  Immediately  after  the  first  day's  fighting 
around  Santiago  the  latter  had  hinted  by  cable  to  Washing 
ton  that  they  might  like  to  withdraw,  and  Washington  had 
emphatically  vetoed  the  proposal.  I  record  this  all  the 
more  gladly  because  there  were  not  too  many  gleams  of 
good  sense  shown  in  the  home  management  of  the  war;  al 
though  I  wish  to  repeat  that  the  real  blame  for  this  rested 
primarily  with  us  ourselves,  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
who  had  for  years  pursued  in  military  matters  a  policy  that 
rendered  it  certain  that  there  would  be  ineptitude  and  fail 
ure  in  high  places  if  ever  a  crisis  came.  After  the  siege  the 
people  in  Washington  showed  no  knowledge  whatever  of  the 
conditions  around  Santiago,  and  proposed  to  keep  the  army 
there.  This  would  have  meant  that  at  least  three-fourths 
of  the  men  would  either  have  died  or  have  been  permanently 
invalided,  as  a  virulent  form  of  malaria  was  widespread, 
and  there  was  a  steady  growth  of  dysentery  and  other  com 
plaints.  No  object  of  any  kind  was  to  be  gained  by  keeping 
the  army  in  or  near  the  captured  city.  General  Shafter  tried 
his  best  to  get  the  Washington  authorities  to  order  the  army 
home.  As  he  failed  to  accomplish  anything,  he  called  a 
council  of  the  division  and  brigade  commanders  and  the 
chief  medical  officers  to  consult  over  the  situation. 

Although  I  had  command  of  a  brigade,  I  was  only  a 
colonel,  and  so  I  did  not  intend  to  attend,  but  the  General 
informed  me  that  I  was  particularly  wanted,  and  accord 
ingly  I  went.  At  the  council  General  Shafter  asked  the 
medical  authorities  as  to  conditions,  and  they  united  in  in 
forming  him  that  they  were  very  bad,  and  were  certain  to 
grow  much  worse;  and  that  in  order  to  avoid  frightful 


246    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ravages  from  disease,  chiefly  due  to  malaria,  the  army 
should  be  sent  back  at  once  to  some  part  of  the  northern 
United  States.  The  General  then  explained  that  he  could 
not  get  the  War  Department  to  understand  the  situation; 
that  he  could  not  get  the  attention  of  the  public;  and  that 
he  felt  that  there  should  be  some  authoritative  publication 
which  would  make  the  War  Department  take  action  before 
it  was  too  late  to  avert  the  ruin  of  the  army.  All  who  were 
in  the  room  expressed  their  agreement. 

Then  the  reason  for  my  being  present  came  out.  It  was 
explained  to  me  by  General  Shafter,  and  by  others,  that 
as  I  was  a  volunteer  officer  and  intended  immediately  to 
return  to  civil  life,  I  could  afford  to  take  risks  which  the 
regular  army  men  could  not  afford  to  take  and  ought  not  to 
be  expected  to  take,  and  that  therefore  I  ought  to  make 
the  publication  in  question;  because  to  incur  the  hostility 
of  the  War  Department  would  not  make  any  difference  to 
me,  whereas  it  would  be  destructive  to  the  men  in  the  regu 
lar  army,  or  to  those  who  hoped  to  get  into  the  regular 
army.  I  thought  this  true,  and  said  I  would  write  a  letter 
or  make  a  statement  which  could  then  be  published.  Brig 
adier-General  Ames,  who  was  in  the  same  position  that  I 
was,  also  announced  that  he  would  make  a  statement. 

When  I  left  the  meeting  it  was  understood  that  I  was  to 
make  my  statement  as  an  interview  in  the  press ;  but  Wood, 
who  was  by  that  time  Brigadier- General  commanding  the 
city  of  Santiago,  gave  me  a  quiet  hint  to  put  my  statement 
in  the  form  of  a  letter  to  General  Shafter,  and  this  I  ac 
cordingly  did.  When  I  had  written  my  letter,  the  corre 
spondent  of  the  Associated  Press,  who  had  been  informed 
by  others  of  what  had  occurred,  accompanied  me  to  General 
Shafter.  I  presented  the  letter  to  General  Shafter,  who 
waved  it  away  and  said:  "I  don't  want  to  take  it;  do 
whatever  you  wish  with  it. ' '  I,  however  insisted  on  handing 
it  to  him,  whereupon  he  shoved  it  toward  the  correspondent 
of  the  Associated  Press,  who  took  hold  of  it,  and  I  released 
my  hold.  General  Ames  made  a  statement  direct  to  the 
correspondent,  and  also  sent  a  cable  to  the  Assistant  Secre- 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        247 

tary  of  the  Navy  at  Washington,  a  copy  of  which  he  gave 
to  the  correspondent.  By  this  time  the  other  division  and 
brigade  commanders  who  were  present  felt  that  they  had 
better  take  action  themselves.  They  united  in  a  round 
robin  to  General  Shafter,  which  General  Wood  dictated, 
and  which  was  signed  by  Generals  Kent,  Bates,  Chaffee, 
Sumner,  Ludlow,  Ames,  and  Wood,  and  by  myself.  General 
Wood  handed  this  to  General  Shafter,  and  it  was  made  pub 
lic  by  General  Shafter  precisely  as  mine  was  made  public.1 
Later  I  was  much  amused  when  General  Shafter  stated 
that  he  could  not  imagine  how  my  letter  and  the  round 
robin  got  out !  When  I  saw  this  statement,  I  appreciated 
how  wise  Wood  had  been  in  hinting  to  me  not  to  act  on  the 
suggestion  of  the  General  that  I  should  make  a  statement  to 
the  newspapers,  but  to  put  my  statement  in  the  form  of  a 
letter  to  him  as  my  superior  officer,  a  letter  which  I  de 
livered  to  him.  Both  the  letter  and  the  round  robin  were 
written  at  General  Shafter 's  wish,  and  at  the  unanimous 
suggestion  of  all  the  commanding  and  medical  officers  of 
the  Fifth  Army  Corps,  and  both  were  published  by  General 
Shafter. 

In  a  regiment  the  prime  need  is  to  have  fighting  men; 
the  prime  virtue  is  to  be  able  and  eager  to  fight  with  the 
utmost  effectiveness.  I  have  never  believed  that  this  was 
incompatible  with  other  virtues.  On  the  contrary,  while 
there  are  of  course  exceptions,  I  believe  that  on  the  average 
the  best  fighting  men  are  also  the  best  citizens.  I  do  not 
believe  that  a  finer  set  of  natural  soldiers  than  the  men  of 
my  rlgiment  could  have  been  found  anywhere,  and  they 
were  first-class  citizens  in  civil  life  also.  One  fact  may  per 
haps  be  worthy  of  note.  Whenever  we  were  in  camp  and 
so  fixed  that  we  could  have  regular  meals,  we  used  to  have 

i  General  Wood  writes  me :  "The  representative  of  the  Associated  Press 
was  very  anxious  to  get  a  copy  of  this  despatch  or  see  it,  and  I  told  him  it 
was  impossible  for  him  to  have  it  or  see  it.  I  then  went  into  General  Shafter 
and  stated  the  case  to  him,  handing  him  the  despatch,  saying,  'The  matter  is 
now  in  your  hands.'  He,  General  Shafter,  then  said,  'I  don't  care  whether  this 
gentleman  has  it  or  not,'  and  I  left  then.  When  I  went  back  the  General  told 
me  he  had  given  the  Press  representative  a  copy  of  the  despatch,  and  that  he 
had  gone  to  the  office  with  it." 


248    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

a  general  officers'  mess,  over  which  I  of  course  presided. 
During  our  entire  service  there  was  never  a  foul  or  inde 
cent  word  uttered  at  the  officers'  mess — I  mean  this  liter 
ally  ;  and  there  was  very  little  swearing — although  now  and 
then  in  the  fighting,  if  there  was  a  moment  when  swearing 
seemed  to  be  the  best  method  of  reaching  the  heart  of  the 
matter,  it  was  resorted  to. 

The  men  I  cared  for  most  in  the  regiment  were  the  men 
who  did  the  best  work;  and  therefore  my  liking  for  them 
was  obliged  to  take  the  shape  of  exposing  them  to  most 
fatigue  and  hardship,  of  demanding  from  them  the  greatest 
service,  and  of  making  them  incur  the  greatest  risk.  Once 
I  kept  Greenway  and  Goodrich  at  work  for  forty-eight 
hours,  without  sleeping,  and  with  very  little  food,  fighting 
and  digging  trenches.  I  freely  sent  the  men  for  whom  I 
cared  most,  to  where  death  might  smite  them;  and  death 
often  smote  them — as  it  did  the  two  best  officers  in  my  regi 
ment,  Allyn  Capron  and  Bucky  O'Neil.  My  men  would  not 
have  respected  me  had  I  acted  otherwise.  Their  creed  was 
my  creed.  The  life  even  of  the  most  useful  man,  of  the  best 
citizen,  is  not  be  hoarded  if  there  be  need  to  spend  it.  I 
felt,  and  feel,  this  about  others;  and  of  course  also  about 
myself.  This  is  one  reason  why  I  have  always  felt  impatient 
contempt  for  the  effort  to  abolish  the  death  penalty  on  ac 
count  of  sympathy  with  criminals.  I  am  willing  to  listen  to 
arguments  in  favor  of  abolishing  the  death  penalty  so  far 
as  they  are  based  purely  on  grounds  of  public  expediency, 
although  these  arguments  have  never  convinced  me.  But 
inasmuch  as,  without  hesitation,  in  the  performance  of  duty, 
I  have  again  and  again  sent  good  and  gallant  and  upright 
men  to  die,  it  seems  to  me  the  height  of  a  folly  both  mis 
chievous  and  mawkish  to  contend  that  criminals  who  have 
deserved  death  should  nevertheless  be  allowed  to  shirk  it. 
No  brave  and  good  man  can  properly  shirk  death;  and 
no  criminal  who  has  earned  death  should  be  allowed  to 
shirk  it. 

One  of  the  best  men  with  our  regiment  was  the  British 
military  attache,  Captain  Arthur  Lee,  an  old  friend.  The 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE    UNREADY        249 

other  military  attaches  were  herded  together  at  head 
quarters  and  saw  little.  Captain  Lee,  who  had  known  me  in 
Washington,  escaped  and  stayed  with  the  regiment.  We 
grew  to  feel  that  he  was  one  of  us,  and  made  him  an  honor 
ary  member.  There  were  two  other  honorary  members. 
One  was  Eichard  Harding  Davis,  who  was  with  us  contin 
ually  and  who  performed  valuable  service  on  the  fighting 
line.  The  other  was  a  regular  officer,  Lieutenant  Parker, 
who  had  a  battery  of  gatlings.  We  were  with  this  battery 
throughout  the  San  Juan  fighting,  and  we  grew  to  have  the 
strongest  admiration  for  Parker  as  a  soldier  and  the  strong 
est  liking  for  him  as  a  man.  During  our  brief  campaign  we 
were  closely  and  intimately  thrown  with  various  regular  offi 
cers  of  the  type  of  Mills,  Howze,  and  Parker.  We  felt  not 
merely  fondness  for  them  as  officers  and  gentlemen,  but 
pride  in  them  as  Americans.  It  is  a  fine  thing  to  feel  that 
we  have  in  the  army  and  in  the  navy  modest,  efficient,  gal 
lant  gentlemen  of  this  type,  doing  such  disinterested  work 
for  the  honor  of  the  flag  and  of  the  Nation.  No  American 
can  overpay  the  debt  of  gratitude  we  all  of  us  owe  to  the 
officers  and  enlisted  men  of  the  army  and  of  the  navy. 

Of  course  with  a  regiment  of  our  type  there  was  much  to 
learn  both  among  the  officers  and  the  men.  There  were 
all  kinds  of  funny  incidents.  One  of  my  men,  an  ex-cow- 
puncher  and  former  round-up  cook,  a  very  good  shot  and 
rider,  got  into  trouble  on  the  way  down  on  the  transport. 
He  understood  entirely  that  he  had  to  obey  the  officers  of 
his  own  regiment,  but,  like  so  many  volunteers,  or  at  least 
like  so  many  volunteers  of  my  regiment,  he  did  not  under 
stand  that  this  obligation  extended  to  officers  of  other  regi 
ments.  One  of  the  regular  officers  on  the  transport  ordered 
him  to  do  something  which  he  declined  to  do.  When  the 
officer  told  him  to  consider  himself  under  arrest,  he  re 
sponded  by  offering  to  fight  him  for  a  trifling  consideration. 
He  was  brought  before  a  court  martial  which  sentenced  him 
to  a  year's  imprisonment  at  hard  labor  with  dishonorable 
discharge,  and  the  major-general  commanding  the  division 
approved  the  sentence. 


250    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

We  were  on  the  transport.  There  was  no  hard  labor 
to  do ;  and  the  prison  consisted  of  another  cow-puncher  who 
kept  guard  over  him  with  his  carbine,  evidently  divided  in 
his  feelings  as  to  whether  he  would  like  most  to  shoot  him 
or  to  let  him  go.  When  we  landed,  somebody  told  the  pris 
oner  that  I  intended  to  punish  him  by  keeping  him  with  the 
baggage.  He  at  once  came  to  me  in  great  agitation,  saying : 
"Colonel,  they  say  you're  going  to  leave  me  with  the  bag 
gage  when  the  fight  is  on.  Colonel,  if  you  do  that,  I  will 
never  show  my  face  in  Arizona  again.  Colonel,  if  you  will 
let  me  go  to  the  front,  I  promise  I  will  obey  any  one  you  say; 
any  one  you  say,  Colonel/'  with  the  evident  feeling  that, 
after  this  concession,  I  could  not,  as  a  gentleman,  refuse  his 
request.  Accordingly  I  answered :  "Shields,  there  is  no  one 
in  this  regiment  more  entitled  to  be  shot  than  you  are,  and 
you  shall  go  to  the  front."  His  gratitude  was  great,  and 
he  kept  repeating,  "I'll  never  forget  this,  Colonel,  never." 
Nor  did  he.  When  we  got  very  hard  up,  he  would  now  and 
then  manage  to  get  hold  of  some  flour  and  sugar,  and  would 
cook  a  doughnut  and  bring  it  round  to  me,  and  watch  me 
with  a  delighted  smile  as  I  ate  it.  He  behaved  extremely 
well  in  both  fights,  and  after  the  second  one  I  had  him 
formally  before  me  and  remitted  his  sentence — something 
which  of  course  I  had  not  the  slightest  power  to  do,  although 
at  the  time  it  seemed  natural  and  proper  to  me. 

When  we  came  to  be  mustered  out,  the  regular  officer 
who  was  doing  the  mustering,  after  all  the  men  had  been 
discharged,  finally  asked  me  where  the  prisoner  was.  I 
said,  "What  prisoner?"  He  said,  "The  prisoner,  the  man 
who  was  sentenced  to  a  year's  imprisonment  with  hard 
labor  and  dishonorable  discharge."  I  said,  "Oh!  I  par 
doned  him";  to  which  he  responded,  "I  beg  your  pardon; 
you  did  what  1 "  This  made  me  grasp  the  fact  that  I  had  ex 
ceeded  authority,  and  I  could  only  answer,  "Well,  I  did 
pardon  him,  anyhow,  and  he  has  gone  with  the  rest"; 
whereupon  the  mustering-out  officer  sank  back  in  his  chair 
and  remarked,  "He  was  sentenced  by  a  court  martial,  and 
the  sentence  was  approved  by  the  major-general  command- 


THE   WAR   OF    AMERICA    THE    UNREADY        251 

ing  the  division.  You  were  a  lieutenant-colonel,  and  you 
pardoned  him.  Well,  it  was  nervy,  that's  all  I'll  say." 

The  simple  fact  was  that  under  the  circumstances  it 
was  necessary  for  me  to  enforce  discipline  and  control  the 
regiment,  and  therefore  to  reward  and  punish  individuals 
in  whatever  way  the  exigencies  demanded.  I  often  ex 
plained  to  the  men  what  the  reasons  for  an  order  were,  the 
first  time  it  was  issued,  if  there  was  any  trouble  on  their 
part  in  understanding  what  they  were  required  to  do.  They 
were  very  intelligent  and  very  eager  to  do  their  duty,  and 
I  hardly  ever  had  any  difficulty  the  second  time  with  them. 
If,  however,  there  was  the  slightest  willful  shirking  of  duty 
or  insubordination,  I  punished  instantly  and  mercilessly, 
and  the  whole  regiment  cordially  backed  me  up.  To  have 
punished  men  for  faults  and  shortcomings  which  they  had 
no  opportunity  to  know  were  such  would  have  been  as  un 
wise  as  to  have  permitted  any  of  the  occasional  bad  char 
acters  to  exercise  the  slightest  license.  It  was  a  regiment 
which  was  sensitive  about  its  dignity  and  was  very  keenly 
alive  to  justice  and  to  courtesy,  but  which  cordially  ap 
proved  absence  of  mollycoddling,  insistence  upon  the  per 
formance  of  duty,  and  summary  punishment  of  wrong-do 
ing. 

In  the  final  fighting  at  San  Juan,  when  we  captured  one 
of  the  trenches,  Jack  Greenway  had  seized  a  Spaniard,  and 
shortly  afterwards  I  found  Jack  leading  his  captive  round 
with  a  string.  I  told  him  to  turn  him  over  to  a  man  who 
had  two  or  three  other  captives,  so  that  they  should  all  be 
taken  to  the  rear.  It  was  the  only  time  I  ever  saw  Jack  look 
aggrieved.  "Why,  Colonel,  can't  I  keep  him  for  myself?" 
he  asked  plaintively.  I  think  he  had  an  idea  that  as  a 
trophy  of  his  bow  and  spear  the  Spaniard  would  make  a  fine 
body  servant. 

One  reason  that  we  never  had  the  slightest  trouble  in  the 
regiment  was  because,  when  we  got  down  to  hard  pan,  offi 
cers  and  men  shared  exactly  alike.  It  is  all  right  to  have 
differences  in  food  and  the  like  in  times  of  peace  and  plenty, 
when  everybody  is  comfortable.  But  in  really  hard  times 


252    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

officers  and  men  must  share  alike  if  the  best  work  is  to  be 
done.  As  long  as  I  had  nothing  but  two  hardtacks,  which 
was  the  allowance  to  each  man  on  the  morning  after  the 
San  Juan  fight,  no  one  could  complain ;  but  if  I  had  had  any 
private  little  luxuries  the  men  would  very  naturally  have 
realized  keenly  their  own  shortages. 

Soon  after  the  Guasimas  fight  we  were  put  on  short 
commons;  and  as  I  knew  that  a  good  deal  of  food  had 
been  landed  and  was  on  the  beach  at  Siboney,  I  marched 
thirty  or  forty  of  the  men  down  to  see  if  I  could  not  get 
some  and  bring  it  up.  I  finally  found  a  commissary  officer, 
and  he  asked  me  what  I  wanted,  and  I  answered,  anything 
he  had.  So  he  told  me  to  look  about  for  myself.  I  found 
a  number  of  sacks  of  beans,  I  think  about  eleven  hundred 
pounds,  on  the  beach;  and  told  the  officer  that  I  wanted 
eleven  hundred  pounds  of  beans.  He  produced  a  book  of 
regulations,  and  showed  me  the  appropriate  section  and  sub 
division  which  announced  that  beans  were  issued  only  for 
the  officers'  mess.  This  did  me  no  good,  and  I  told  him  so. 
He  said  he  was  sorry,  and  I  answered  that  he  was  not  as 
sorry  as  I  was.  I  then  "studied  on  it,"  as  Br'r  Kabbit 
would  say,  and  came  back  with  a  request  for  eleven  hundred 
pounds  of  beans  for  the  officers'  mess.  He  said,  "Why, 
Colonel,  your  officers  can't  eat  eleven  hundred  pounds  of 
beans/'  to  which  I  responded,  "You  don't  know  what  appe 
tites  my  officers  have."  He  then  said  he  would  send  the 
requisition  to  Washington.  I  told  him  I  was  quite  willing, 
so  long  as  he  gave  me  the  beans.  He  was  a  good  fellow,  so 
we  finally  effected  a  working  compromise — he  got  the  requi 
sition  and  I  got  the  beans,  although  he  warned  me  that  the 
price  would  probably  be  deducted  from  my  salary. 

Under  some  regulation  or  other  only  the  regular  supply 
trains  were  allowed  to  act,  and  we  were  supposed  not  to 
have  any  horses  or  mules  in  the  regiment  itself.  This  was 
very  pretty  in  theory ;  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  supply 
trains  were  not  numerous  enough.  My  men  had  a  natural 
genius  for  acquiring  horseflesh  in  odd  ways,  and  I  contin 
ually  found  that  they  had  staked  out  in  the  brush  various 


THE   WAR   OF   AMERICA   THE   UNREADY        253 

captured  Spanish  cavalry  horses  and  Cuban  ponies  and 
abandoned  commissary  mules.  Putting  these  together,  I 
would  organize  a  small  pack  train  and  work  it  industriously 
for  a  day  or  two,  until  they  learned  about  it  at  headquarters 
and  confiscated  it.  Then  I  would  have  to  wait  for  a  week 
or  so  until  my  men  had  accumulated  some  more  ponies, 
horses,  and  mules,  the  regiment  meanwhile  living  in  plenty 
on  what  we  had  got  before  the  train  was  confiscated. 

All  of  our  men  were  good  at  accumulating  horses,  but 
within  our  own  ranks  I  think  we  were  inclined  to  award  the 
palm  to  our  chaplain.  There  was  not  a  better  man  in  the 
regiment  than  the  chaplain,  and  there  could  not  have  been  a 
better  chaplain  for  our  men.  He  took  care  of  the  sick  and 
the  wounded,  he  never  spared  himself,  and  he  did  every 
duty.  In  addition,  he  had  a  natural  aptitude  for  acquiring 
mules,  which  made  some  admirer,  when  the  regiment  was 
disbanded,  propose  that  we  should  have  a  special  medal 
struck  for  him,  with  on  the  obverse,  "A  Mule  passant  and 
Chaplain  regardant."  After  the  surrender  of  Santiago,  a 
Philadelphia  clergyman  whom  I  knew  came  down  to  General 
Wheeler's  headquarters,  and  after  visiting  him  announced 
that  he  intended  to  call  on  the  Eough  Eiders,  because  he 
knew  their  colonel.  One  of  General  Wheeler's  aides,  Lieu 
tenant  Steele,  wrho  liked  us  both  individually  and  as  a  regi 
ment,  and  who  appreciated  some  of  our  ways,  asked  the 
clergyman,  after  he  had  announced  that  he  knew  Colonel 
Eoosevelt,  "But  do  you  know  Colonel  Eoosevelt's  regi 
ment!"  "No,"  said  the  clergyman.  "Very  well,  then,  let 
me  give  you  a  piece  of  advice.  When  you  go  down  to  see 
the  Colonel,  don't  let  your  horse  out  of  your  sight;  and  if 
the  chaplain  is  there,  don't  get  off  the  horse!" 

We  came  back  to  Montauk  Point  and  soon  after  were  dis 
banded.  We  had  been  in  the  service  only  a  little  over  four 
months.  There  are  no  four  months  of  my  life  to  which  I 
look  back  with  more  pride  and  satisfaction.  I  believe  most 
earnestly  and  sincerely  in  peace,  but  as  things  are  yet  in 
this  world  the  nation  that  cannot  fight,  the  people  that  have 
lost  the  fighting  edge,  that  have  lost  the  virile  virtues,  oc- 


254    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

cupy  a  position  as  dangerous  as  it  is  ignoble.  The  future 
greatness  of  America  in  no  small  degree  depends  upon  the 
possession  by  the  average  American  citizen  of  the  qualities 
which  my  men  showed  when  they  served  under  me  at  San 
tiago. 

Moreover,  there  is  one  thing  in  connection  with  this  war 
which  it  is  well  that  our  people  should  remember,  our  people 
who  genuinely  love  the  peace  of  righteousness,  the  peace  of 
justice — and  I  would  be  ashamed  to  be  other  than  a  lover 
of  the  peace  of  righteousness  and  of  justice.  The  true 
preachers  of  peace,  who  strive  earnestly  to  bring  nearer 
the  day  when  peace  shall  obtain  among  all  peoples,  and 
who  really  do  help  forward  the  cause,  are  men  who  never 
hesitate  to  choose  righteous  war  when  it  is  the  only  alterna 
tive  to  unrighteous  peace.  These  are  the  men  who,  like  Dr. 
Lyman  Abbott,  have  backed  every  genuine  movement  for 
peace  in  this  country,  and  who  nevertheless  recognized  our 
clear  duty  to  war  for  the  freedom  of  Cuba. 

But  there  are  other  men  who  put  peace  ahead  of  right 
eousness,  and  who  care  so  little  for  facts  that  they  treat 
fantastic  declarations  for  immediate  universal  arbitration 
as  being  valuable,  instead  of  detrimental,  to  the  cause  they 
profess  to  champion,  and  who  seek  to  make  the  United 
States  impotent  for  international  good  under  the  pretense 
of  making  us  impotent  for  international  evil.  All  the  men  of 
this  kind,  and  all  of  the  organizations  they  have  controlled, 
since  we  began  our  career  as  a  nation,  all  put  together, 
have  not  accomplished  one  hundredth  part  as  much  for  both 
peace  and  righteousness,  have  not  done  one  hundredth  part 
as  much  either  for  ourselves  or  for  other  peoples,  as  was 
accomplished  by  the  people  of  the  United  States  when  they 
fought  the  war  with  Spain  and  with  resolute  good  faith  and 
common  sense  worked  out  the  solution  of  the  problems 
which  sprang  from  the  war. 

Our  army  and  navy,  and  above  all  our  people,  learned 
some  lessons  from  the  Spanish  War,  and  applied  them  to 
our  own  uses.  During  the  following  decade  the  improve 
ment  in  our  navy  and  army  was  very  great ;  not  in  material 


THE   WAR  OF   AMERICA   THE   UNREADY        255 

only,  but  also  in  personnel,  and,  above  all,  in  the  ability  to 
handle  our  forces  in  good-sized  units.  By  1908,  when  our 
battle  fleet  steamed  round  the  world,  the  navy  had  become 
in  every  respect  as  fit  a  fighting  instrument  as  any  other 
navy  in  the  world,  fleet  for  fleet.  Even  in  size  there  was  but 
one  nation,  England,  which  was  completely  out  of  our  class ; 
and  in  view  of  our  relations  with  England  and  all  the  Eng 
lish-speaking  peoples,  this  was  of  no  consequence.  Of  our 
army,  of  course,  as  much  could  not  be  said.  Nevertheless 
the  improvement  in  efficiency  was  marked.  Our  artillery 
was  still  very  inferior  in  training  and  practice  to  the  artil 
lery  arm  of  any  one  of  the  great  Powers  such  as  Germany, 
France,  or  Japan — a  condition  which  we  only  then  began 
to  remedy.  But  the  workmanlike  speed  and  efficiency  with 
which  the  expedition  of  some  6000  troops  of  all  arms  was 
mobilized  and  transported  to  Cuba  during  the  revolution  of 
1908  showed  that,  as  regards  our  cavalry  and  infantry,  we 
had  at  least  reached  the  point  where  we  could  assemble  and 
handle  in  first-rate  fashion  expeditionary  forces.  This  is 
mighty  little  to  boast  of,  for  a  Nation  of  our  wealth  and 
population;  it  is  not  pleasant  to  compare  it  with  the  ex 
traordinary  feats  of  contemporary  Japan  and  the  Balkan 
peoples ;  but,  such  as  it  is,  it  represents  a  long  stride  in  ad,- 
vance  over  conditions  as  they  were  in  1898, 


APPENDIX  A 

A   MANLY   LETTER 

There  was  a  sequel  to  the  "round  robin "  incident  which  caused 
a  little  stir  at  the  moment ;  Secretary  Alger  had  asked  me  to  write 
him  freely  from  time  to  time.  Accordingly,  after  the  surrender  of 
Santiago,  I  wrote  him  begging  that  the  cavalry  division  might 
be  put  into  the  Porto  Kican  fighting,  preparatory  to  what  we  sup 
posed  would  be  the  big  campaign  against  Havana  in  the  fall.  In 
the  letter  I  extolled  the  merits  of  the  Rough  Riders  and  of  the 
Regulars,  announcing  with  much  complacency  that  each  of  our 
regiments  was  worth  "  three  of  the  National  Guard  regiments, 
armed  with  their  archaic  black  powder  rifles. ' ' l  Secretary  Alger 
believed,  mistakenly,  that  I  had  made  public  the  round  robin,  and 
was  naturally  irritated,  and  I  suddenly  received  from  him  a  pub 
lished  telegram,  not  alluding  to  the  round  robin  incident,  but 
quoting  my  reference  to  the  comparative  merits  of  the  cavalry 
regiments  and  the  National  Guard  regiments  and  rebuking  me  for 
it.  The  publication  of  the  extract  from  my  letter  was  not  cal 
culated  to  help  me  secure  the  votes  of  the  National  Guard  if  I  ever 
became  a  candidate  for  office.  However,  I  did  not  mind  the 
matter  much,  for  I  had  at  the  time  no  idea  of  being  a  candidate 
for  anything — while  in  the  campaign  I  ate  and  drank  and  thought 
and  dreamed  regiment  and  nothing  but  regiment,  until  I  got  the 
brigade,  and  then  I  devoted  all  my  thoughts  to  handling  the 
brigade.  Anyhow,  there  was  nothing  I  could  do  about  the  matter. 

When  our  transport  reached  Mont  auk  Point,  an  army  officer 
came  aboard  and  before  doing  anything  else  handed  me  a  sealed 
letter  from  the  Secretary  of  War  which  ran  as  follows: — 

WAR  DEPARTMENT, 

WASHINGTON, 
August  10,  1898. 
DEAR  COL.  ROOSEVELT: 

You  have  been  a  most  gallant  officer  and  in  the  battle  before 
Santiago  showed  superb  soldiery  qualities.  I  would  rather  add 

1 1  quote  this  sentence  from  memory ;  it  is  substantially  correct. 

256 


APPENDIX  257 

to,  than  detract  from,  the  honors  you  have  so  fairly  won,  and  I 
wish  you  all  good  things.  In  a  moment  of  aggravation  under 
great  stress  of  feeling,  first  because  I  thought  you  spoke  in  a  dis 
paraging  manner  of  the  volunteers  (probably  without  intent,  but 
because  of  your  great  enthusiasm  for  your  own  men)  and  second 
that  I  believed  your  published  letter  would  embarrass  the  Depart 
ment  I  sent  you  a  telegram  which  with  an  extract  from  a  private 
letter  of  yours  I  gave  to  the  press.  I  would  gladly  recall  both  if  I 
could,  but  unable  to  do  that  I  write  you  this  letter  which  I  hope  you 
will  receive  in  the  same  friendly  spirit  in  which  I  send  it.  Come 
and  see  me  at  a  very  early  day.  No  one  will  welcome  you  more 
heartily  than  I. 

Yours  very  truly, 

(Signed)     R.  A.  ALGER. 

I  thought  this  a  manly  letter,  and  paid  no  more  heed  to  the 
incident;  and  when  I  was  President,  and  General  Alger  was 
Senator  from  Michigan,  he  was  my -stanch  friend  and  on  most 
matters  my  supporter. 

APPENDIX  B 

THE   SAN    JUAN   FIGHT 

The  San  Juan  fight  took  its  name  from  the  San  Juan  Hill  or  hills 
— I  do  not  know  whether  the  name  properly  belonged  to  a  line  of 
hills  or  to  only  one  hill. 

To  compare  small  things  with  large  things,  this  was  precisely  as 
the  Battle  of  Gettysburg  took  its  name  from  the  village  of  Gettys 
burg,  where  only  a  small  part  of  the  fighting  was  done;  and  the 
Battle  of  Waterloo  from  the  village  of  Waterloo,  where  none  of 
the  fighting  was  done.  When  it  became  the  political  interest 
of  certain  people  to  endeavor  to  minimize  my  part  in  the  Santiago 
fighting  (which  was  merely  like  that  of  various  other  squadron, 
battalion  and  regimental  commanders)  some  of  my  opponents 
laid  great  stress  on  the  alleged  fact  that  the  cavalry  did  not  charge 
up  San  Juan  Hill.  We  certainly  charged  some  hills;  but  I  did 
not  ask  their  names  before  charging  them.  To  say  that  the  Rough 
Riders  and  the  cavalry  division,  and  among  other  people  myself, 
were  not  in  the  San  Juan  fight  is  precisely  like  saying  that  the  men 
who  made  Pickett  's  Charge,  or  the  men  who  fought  at  Little  Round 
Top  and  Culps  Hill,  were  not  at  Gettysburg;  or  that  Picton  and 
the  Scotch  Greys  and  the  French  and  English  guards  were  not  at 
Waterloo.  The  present  Vice-President  of  the  United  States  in  the 
campaign  last  year  was  reported  in  the  press  as  repeatedly  saying 


258    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

that  I  was  not  in  the  San  Juan  fight.  The  documents  following 
herewith  have  been  printed  for  many  years,  and  were  accessible 
to  him  had  he  cared  to  know  or  to  tell  the  truth. 

These  documents  speak  for  themselves.  The  first  is  the  official 
report  issued  by  the  War  Department.  From  this  it  will  be  seen 
that  there  were  in  the  Santiago  fighting  thirty  infantry  and  cav 
alry  regiments  represented.  Six  of  these  were  volunteer,  of  which 
one  was  the  Rough  Riders.  The  other  twenty-four  were  regular 
regiments.  The  percentage  of  loss  of  our  regiment  was  about 
seven  times  as  great  as  that  of  the  other  five  volunteer  regiments. 
Of  the  twenty-four  regular  regiments,  twenty-two  suffered  a  smaller 
percentage  of  loss  than  we  suffered.  Two,  the  Sixth  United  States 
Infantry  and  the  Thirteenth  United  States  Infantry,  suffered  a 
slightly  greater  percentage  of  loss— twenty-six  per  cent  and 
twenty-three  per  cent  as  against  twenty-two  per  cent. 

(CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD,  55TH  CONGRESS,  THIRD  SESSION, 
VOLUME  32,  PART  II,  PAGE  1250) 


NOMINATIONS   BY   THE   PRESIDENT 

To  "be  Colonel  by  Brevet 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Theodore  Roosevelt,  First  Volunteer  Car- 
airy,  for  gallantry  in  battle,  Las  Guasima,  Cuba,  June  24,  1898. 

To  "be  Brigadier-General  by  Brevet 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Theodore  Roosevelt,  First  Volunteer  Cav 
alry,  for  gallantry  in  battle,  Santiago  de  Cuba,  July  1,  1898. 
(Nominated  for  brevet  colonel,  to  rank  from  June  24,  1898.) 

FORT  SAN  JUAN,  CUBA, 
July  17,  1898. 

THE  ADJUTANT-GENERAL  UNITED  STATES  ARMY, 
Washington,  D.  C. 

(Through  military  channels) 

SIR  :  I  have  the  honor  to  invite  attention  to  the  following  list  of 
officers  and  enlisted  men  who  specially  distinguished  themselves 
in  the  action  at  Las  Guasimas,  Cuba,  June  24,  1898. 

These  officers  and  men  have  been  recommended  for  favorable 
consideration  by  their  immediate  commanding  officers  in  their 


APPENDIX  259 

respective  reports,  and  I  would  respectfully  urge  that  favorable 
Action  be  taken. 

OFFICERS 

In  First  United  States  Volunteer  Cavalry — Colonel  Leonard 
Wood,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Roosevelt. 

Respectfully, 

JOSEPH  WHEELER, 
Major-General  United  States  Volunteers,  Commanding. 

HEADQUARTERS  SECOND  CAVALRY  BRIGADE, 
CAMP  NEAR  SANTIAGO  DE  CUBA,  CUBA, 

June  29,  1898. 
THE  ADJUTANT-GENERAL  CAVALRY  DIVISION. 

SIR  :  By  direction  of  the  major-general  commanding  the  Cavalry 
Division,  I  have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
engagement  of  a  part  of  this  brigade  with  the  enemy  at  Guasimas, 
Cuba,  on  June  24th,  accompanied  by  detailed  reports  from  the 
regimental  and  other  commanders  engaged,  and  a  list  of  the  killed 
and  wounded: 

I  cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  efficient  manner  in  which 
Colonel  Wood  handled  his  regiment,  and  of  his  magnificent  be 
havior  on  the  field.  The  conduct  of  Lieutenant- Colonel  Roosevelt, 
as  reported  to  me  by  my  two  aides,  deserves  my  highest  commenda 
tion.  Both  Colonel  Wood  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Roosevelt  dis 
dained  to  take  advantage  of  shelter  or  cover  from  the  enemy's 
fire  while  any  of  their  men  remained  exposed  to  it — an  error  of 
judgment,  but  happily  on  the  heroic  side. 

Very  respectfully, 

S.  B.  M.  YOUNG, 
Brigadier  General  United  States  Volunteers,  Commanding. 

HEADQUARTERS  FIRST  DIVISION  SECOND  ARMY  CORPS 

CAMP  MACKENZIE,  GA., 

December  30,  1898. 
ADJUTANT-GENERAL, 
Washington,  D.  C. 

SIR:  I  have  the  honor  to  recommend  Hon.  Theodore  Roosevelt, 
late  Colonel  First  United  States  Volunteer  Cavalry,  for  a  medal  of 
honor,  as  a  reward  for  conspicuous  gallantry  at  the  battle  of  San 
Juan,  Cuba,  on  July  1,  1898. 


260    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Colonel  Roosevelt  by  his  example  and  fearlessness  inspired  his 
men,  and  both  at  Kettle  Hill  and  the  ridge  known  as  San  Juan  he 
led  his  command  in  person.  I  was  an  eye-witness  of  Colonel 
Roosevelt's  action. 

As  Colonel  Roosevelt  has  left  the  service,  a  Brevet  Commission 
is  of  no  particular  value  in  his  case. 

Very  respectfully, 

SAMUEL  S.  SUMNER, 
Major-General  United  States  Volunteers. 

WEST  POINT,  N.  Y., 

December  17,  1898. 

MY  DEAR  COLONEL:  I  saw  you  lead  the  line  up  the  first  hill — 
you  were  certainly  the  first  officer  to  reach  the  top — and  through 
your  efforts,  and  your  personally  jumping  to  the  front,  a  line  more 
or  less  thin,  but  strong  enough  to  take  it,  was  led  by  you  to  the  San 
Juan  or  first  hill.  In  this  your  life  was  placed  in  extreme  jeopardy, 
as  you  may  recall,  and  as  it  proved  by  the  number  of  dead  left  in 
that  vicinity.  Captain  Stevens,  then  of  the  Ninth  Cavalry,  now 
of  the  Second  Cavalry,  was  with  you,  and  I  am  sure  he  recalls  your 
gallant  conduct.  After  the  line  started  on  the  advance  from  the 
first  hill,  I  did  not  see  you  until  our  line  was  halted,  under  a  most 
galling  fire,  at  the  extreme  front,  where  you  afterwards  entrenched. 
I  spoke  to  you  there  and  gave  instructions  from  General  Sumner 
that  the  position  was  to  be  held  and  that  there  would  be  no  further 
advance  till  further  orders.  You  were  the  senior  officer  there, 
took  charge  of  the  line,  scolded  me  for  having  my  horse  so  high 
upon  the  ridge;  at  the  same  time  you  were  exposing  yourself 
most  conspicuously,  while  adjusting  the  line,  for  the  example  was 
necessary,  as  was  proved  when  several  colored  soldiers — about 
eight  or  ten,  Twenty-fourth  Infantry,  I  think — started  at  a  run 
to  the  rear  to  assist  a  wounded  colored  soldier,  and  you  drew  your 
revolver  and  put  a  short  and  effective  stop  to  such  apparent 
stampede — it  quieted  them.  That  position  was  hot,  and  now  I 
marvel  at  your  escaping  there.  .  .  . 

Very  sincerely  yours, 

ROBERT  L.  HOWZE. 

WEST  POINT,  N.  Y., 

December  17,  1898. 

I  hereby  certify  that  on  July  1,  1898,  Colonel  (then  Lieutenant- 
Colonel)  Theodore  Roosevelt,  First  Volunteer  Cavalry,  distin 
guished  himself  through  the  action,  and  on  two  occasions  during 
the  battle  when  I  was  an  eye-witness,  his  conduct  was  most  con 
spicuous  and  clearly  distinguished  above  other  men,  as  follows: 


APPENDIX  261 

1.  At  the  base  of  San.  Juan,  or  first  hill,  there  was  a  strong  wire 
fence,  or  entanglement,  at  which  the  line  hesitated  under  a  galling 
fire,  and  where  the  losses  were  severe.     Colonel  Roosevelt  jumped 
through  the  fence  and  by  his  enthusiasm,  his  example  and  courage 
succeeded  in  leading  to  the  crest  of  the  hill  a  line  sufficiently  strong 
to  capture  it.     In  this  charge  the  Cavalry  Brigade  suffered  its 
greatest  loss,  and  the  Colonel's  life  was  placed  in  extreme  jeopardy, 
owing  to  the  conspicuous  position  he  took  in  leading  the  line,  and 
being  the  first  to  reach  the  crest  of  that  hill,  while  under  heavy  fire 
of  the  enemy  at  close  range. 

2.  At  the  extreme  advanced  position   occupied  by   our  lines, 
Colonel  Roosevelt  found  himself  the  senior,  and  under  his  instruc 
tions  from  General  Sumner  to  hold  that  position.     He  displayed 
the  greatest  bravery  and  placed  his  life  in  extreme  jeopardy  by 
unavoidable  exposure  to  severe  fire  while  adjusting  and  strengthen 
ing  the  line,  placing  the  men  in  positions  which  afforded  best  pro 
tection,  etc.,  etc.    His  conduct  and  example  steadied  the  men,  and 
on  one  occasion  by  severe  but  unnecessary  measures  prevented  a 
small  detachment  from  stampeding  to  the  rear.    He  displayed  the 
most  conspicuous  gallantry,  courage  and  coolness,  in  performing 
extraordinarily  hazardous  duty. 

ROBERT  L.  HOWZE, 
Captain  A.  A.  G.,  U.  8.  V. 
(First  Lieutenant  Sixth  United  States  Cavalry.) 

To  THE  ADJUTANT-GENERAL  UNITED  STATES  ARMY, 
Washington,  D.  C. 

HEADQUARTERS  UNITED  STATES  MILITARY  ACADEMY, 

WEST  POINT,  N.  Y., 
April  5,  1899. 

LIEUTENANT-COLONEL  W.   H.    CARTER, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General  United  States  Army, 
Washington,  D.  C. 

SIR:  In  compliance  with  the  request,  contained  in  your  letter 
of  April  30th,  of  the  Board  convened  to  consider  the  awarding  of 
brevets,  medals  of  honor,  etc.,  for  the  Santiago  Campaign,  that  I 
state  any  facts,  within  my  knowledge  as  Adjutant-General  of  the 
Brigade  in  which  Colonel  Theodore  Roosevelt  served,  to  aid  the 
Board  in  determining,  in  connection  with  Colonel  Roosevelt's 
application  for  a  medal  of  honor,  whether  his  conduct  at  Santiago 
was  such  as  to  distinguish  him  above  others,  I  have  the  honor  to 
submit  the  following: 

My  duties  on  July  1,  1898,  brought  me  in  constant  observation 
of  and  contact  with  Colonel  Roosevelt  from  early  morning  until 


262    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT- AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

shortly  before  the  climax  of  the  assault  of  the  Cavalry  Division 
on  the  San  Juan  Hill — the  so-called  Kettle  Hill.  During  this 
time,  while  under  the  enemy's  artillery  fire  at  El  Poso,  and  while 
on  the  march  from  El  Poso  by  the  San  Juan  ford  to  the  point  from 
which  his  regiment  moved  to  the  assault — about  two  miles,  the 
greater  part  under  fire — Colonel  Roosevelt  was  conspicuous  above 
any  others  I  observed  in  his  regiment  in  the  zealous  performance 
of  duty,  in  total  disregard  of  his  personal  danger  and  in  his  eager 
ness  to  meet  the  enemy.  At  El  Poso,  when  the  enemy  opened 
on  that  place  with  artillery  fire,  a  shrapnel  bullet  grazed  and 
bruised  one  of  Colonel  Roosevelt's  wrists.  The  incident  did  not 
lessen  his  hazardous  exposure,  but  he  continued  so  exposed  until 
he  had  placed  his  command  under  cover.  In  moving  to  the  assault 
of  San  Juan  Hill,  Colonel  Roosevelt  was  most  conspicuously  brave, 
gallant  and  indifferent  to  his  own  safety.  He,  in  the  open,  led  his 
regiment;  no  officer  could  have  set  a  more  striking  example  to  his 
men  or  displayed  greater  intrepidity. 

Very  respectfully, 

Your  obedient  servant, 

A.  L.  MILLS, 
Colonel  United  States  Army,  Superintendent. 

HEADQUARTERS  DEPARTMENT  OF  SANTIAGO  DE  CUBA, 

SANTIAGO  DE  CUBA, 

December  30,  1898. 

To  THE  ADJUTANT-GENERAL,  UNITED  STATES  ARMY, 
Washington,  D.  C. 

SIR  :  I  have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  statement  relative 
to  the  conduct  of  Colonel  Theodore  Roosevelt,  late  First  United 
States  Volunteer  Cavalry,  during  the  assault  upon  San  Juan  Hill, 
July  1,  1898. 

I  have  already  recommended  this  officer  for  a  medal  of  honor, 
which  I  understand  has  been  denied  him,  upon  the  ground  that 
my  previous  letter  was  too  indefinite.  I  based  my  recommenda 
tion  upon  the  fact  that  Colonel  Roosevelt,  accompanied  only  by 
four  or  five  men,  led  a  very  desperate  and  extremely  gallant  charge 
on  San  Juan  Hill,  thereby  setting  a  splendid  example  to  the  troops 
and  encouraging  them  to  pass  over  the  open  country  intervening 
between  their  position  and  the  trenches  of  the  enemy.  In  leading 
this  charge,  he  started  off  first,  as  he  supposed,  with  quite  a  fol 
lowing  of  men,  but  soon  discovered  that  he  was  alone.  He  then 
returned  and  gathered  up  a  few  men  and  led  them  to  the  charge, 
as  above  stated.  The  charge  in  itself  was  an  extremely  gallant 
one,  and  the  example  set  a  most  inspiring  one  to  the  troops  in  that 


APPENDIX  263 

part  of  the  line,  and  while  it  is  perfectly  true  that  everybody  finally 
went  up  the  hill  in  good  style,  yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  the 
magnificent  example  set  by  Colonel  Roosevelt  had  a  very  encourag 
ing  effect  and  had  great  weight  in  bringing  up  the  troops  behind 
him.  During  the  assault,  Colonel  Roosevelt  was  the  first  to  reach 
the  trenches  in  his  part  of  the  line  and  killed  one  of  the  enemy 
with  his  own  hand. 

I  earnestly  recommend  that  the  medal  be  conferred  upon  Colonel 
Roosevelt,  for  I  believe  that  he  in  every  way  deserves  it,  and  that 
his  services  on  the  day  in  question  were  of  great  value  and  of  a 
most  distinguished  character. 

Very  respectfully, 

LEONARD  WOOD, 

Major-General,  United  States  Volunteers, 
Commanding  Department  of  Santiago  de  Cuba. 

HUNTSVILLE,  ALA., 

January  4,  1899. 
THE  ADJUJANT-GENERAL,  UNITED  STATES  ARMY, 

Washington,  D.  C. 

SIR:  I  have  the  honor  to  recommend  that  a  " Congressional 
Medal  of  Honor"  be  given  to  Theodore  Roosevelt  (late  Colonel 
First  Volunteer  Cavalry),  for  distinguished  conduct  and  con 
spicuous  bravery  in  command  of  his  regiment  in  the  charge  011 
San  Juan  Hill,  Cuba,  July  1,  1898. 

In  compliance  with  G.  0.  135,  A.  G.  0.  1898,  I  enclose  my 
certificate  showing  my  personal  knowledge  of  Colonel  Roosevelt's 
conduct. 

Very  respectfully, 

C.  J.  STEVENS, 
Captain  Second  Cavalry. 

I  hereby  certify  that  on  July  1,  1898,  at  the  battle  of  San  Juan, 
Cuba,  I  witnessed  Colonel  (then  Lieutenant-Colonel)  Roosevelt, 
First  Volunteer  Cavalry,  United  States  of  America,  mounted, 
leading  his  regiment  in  the  charge  on  San  Juan.  By  his  gallantry 
and  strong  personality  he  contributed  most  materially  to  the  suc 
cess  of  the  charge  of  the  Cavalry  Division  up  San  Juan  Hill. 

Colonel  Roosevelt  was  among  the  first  to  reach  the  crest  of  the 
hill;  and  his  dashing  example,  his  absolute  fearlessness  and  gallant 
leading  rendered  his  conduct  conspicuous  and  clearly  distinguished 
above  other  men. 

C.  J.  STEVENS, 
Captain  Second  Cavalry, 
(Late  First  Lieutenant  Ninth  Cavalry.) 


264    THEODORA    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

YOUNG'S  ISL.AND,  S.  U., 

December  28,  1898. 
To  THE  ADJUTANT-GENERAL,  UNITED  STATES  ARMY. 

Washington,  D.  C. 

SIR:  Believing  that  information  relating  to  superior  conduct 
on  the  part  of  any  of  the  higher  officers  who  participated  in  the 
Spanish- American  War  (and  which  information  may  not  have  been 
given)  would  be  appreciated  by  the  Department  over  which  you 
preside,  I  have  the  honor  to  call  your  attention  to  the  part  borne 
by  Colonel  Theodore  Roosevelt,  of  the  late  First  United  States 
Volunteer  Cavalry,  in  the  battle  of  July  1st  last.  I  do  this  not 
only  because  I  think  you  ought  to  know,  but  because  his  regi 
ment  as  a  whole  were  very  proud  of  his  splendid  actions  that  day 
and  believe  they  call  for  that  most  coveted  distinction  of  the 
American  officer,  the  Medal  of  Honor.  Held  in  support,  he 
brought  his  regiment,  at  exactly  the  right  time,  not  only  up  to  the 
line  of  regulars,  but  went  through  them  and  headed,  on  horseback, 
the  charge  on  Kettle  Hill;  this  being  done  on  his  own  initiative, 
the  regulars  as  well  as  his  own  men  following.  He  then  headed  the 
charge  on  the  next  hill,  both  regulars  and  the  First  United  States 
Volunteer  Cavalry  following.  He  was  so  near  the  intrenchments 
on  the  second  hill,  that  he  shot  and  killed  with  a  revolver  one  of  the 
enemy  before  they  broke  completely.  He  then  led  the  cavalry 
on  the  chain  of  hills  overlooking  Santiago,  where  he  remained  in 
charge  of  all  the  cavalry  that  was  at  the  extreme  front  for  the  rest 
of  that  day  and  night.  His  unhesitating  gallantry  in  taking  the 
initiative  against  intrenchments  lined  by  men  armed  with  rapid 
fire  guns  certainly  won  him  the  highest  consideration  and  admira 
tion  of  all  who  witnessed  his  conduct  throughout  that  day. 

What  I  here  write  I  can  bear  witness  to  from  personally  having 
seen. 

Very  respectfully, 

M.  J.  JENKINS, 
Major  Late  First  United  States  Cavalry. 

PRESCOTT,  A.  T. 
December  25,  1898. 

I  was  Colonel  Roosevelt's  orderly  at  the  battle  of  San  Juan  Hill, 
and  from  that  time  on  until  our  return  to  Montauk  Point.  I  was 
with  him  all  through  the  fighting,  and  believe  I  was  the  only  man 
who  was  always  with  him,  though  during  part  of  the  time  Lieuten 
ants  Ferguson  and  Greenwald  were  also  close  to  him.  He  led  our 
regiment  forward  on  horseback  until  he  came  to  the  men  of  the 
Ninth  Cavalry  lying  down.  He  led  us  through  these  and  they 


APPENDIX  265 

got  up  and  joined  us.  He  gave  the  order  to  charge  on  Kettle  Hill, 
and  led  us  on  horseback  up  the  hill,  both  Kough  Eiders  and  the 
Ninth  Cavalry.  He  was  the  first  on  the  hill,  I  being  very  nearly 
alongside  of  him.  Some  Spanish  riflemen  were  coming  out  of  the 
mtreiichments  and  he  killed  one  with  his  revolver.  He  took  the 
men  on  to  the  crest  of  the  hill  and  bade  them  begin  firing  on  the 
blockhouse  on  the  hill  to  our  left,  the  one  the  infantry  were  attack 
ing.  When  we  took  it,  he  gave  the  order  to  charge,  and  led  the 
troops  on  Kettle  Hill  forward  against  the  blockhouse  on  our  front. 
He  then  had  charge  of  all  the  cavalry  on  the  hills  overlooking 
Santiago,  where  we  afterwards  dug  our  trenches.  He  had  com 
mand  that  afternoon  and  night,  and  for  the  rest  of  the  time  com 
manded  our  regiment  at  this  point. 

Yours  very  truly, 

H.  P.  BARDSHAR. 


CAMBRIDGE,  MD., 

March  27,  1902. 

THEODORE  ROOSEVELT,  President  of  the  United  States. 
Washington,  D.  C. 

DEAR  SIR:  At  your  request,  I  send  you  the  following  extracts 
from  my  diary,  and  from  notes  taken  on  the  day  of  the  assault  on 
San  Juan.  I  kept  in  my  pocket  a  small  pad  on  which  incidents 
were  noted  daily  from  the  landing  until  the  surrender.  On  the 
day  of  the  fight  notes  were  taken  just  before  Grimes  fired  his  first 
gun,  just  after  the  third  reply  from  the  enemy — when  we  were 
massed  in  the  road  about  seventy  paces  from  Grimes'  guns,  and 
when  I  was  beginning  to  get  scared  and  to  think  I  would  be  killed 
— at  the  halt  just  before  you  advanced,  and  under  the  shelter  of 
the  hills  in  the  evening.  Each  time  that  notes  were  taken,  the 
page  was  put  in  an  envelope  addressed  to  my  wife.  At  the  first 
chance  they  were  mailed  to  her,  and  on  my  arrival  in  the  United 
States  the  story  of  the  fight,  taken  from  these  notes,  was  entered  in 
the  diary  I  keep  in  a  book.  I  make  this  lengthy  explanation  that 
you  may  see  that  everything  put  down  was  fresh  in  my  memory. 

I  quote  from  my  diary:  "The  tension  on  the  men  was  great. 
Suddenly  a  line  of  men  appeared  coming  from  our  right.  They 
were  advancing  through  the  long  grass,  deployed  as  skirmishers 
and  were  under  fire.  At  their  head,  or  rather  in  front  of  them  and 
leading  them,  rode  Colonel  Roosevelt.  He  was  very  conspicuous, 
mounted  as  he  was.  The  men  were  the  'Rough  Riders/  so-called. 
I  heard  some  one  calling  to  them  not  to  fire  into  us,  and  seeing 
Colonel  Carrol,  reported  to  him,  and  was  told  to  go  out  and  meet 
them,  and  caution  them  as  to  our  position,  we  being  between  them 


266    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

and  the  enemy.  I  did  so,  speaking  to  Colonel  Roosevelt.  I  also 
told  him  we  were  under  orders  not  to  advance,  and  asked  him  if  he 
had  received  any  orders.  He  replied  that  he  was  going  to  charge 
the  Spanish  trenches,  I  told  this  to  Colonel  Carrol,  and  to 
Captain  Dimmick,  our  squadron  commander.  A  few  moments 
after  the  word  passed  down  that  our  left  (Captain  Taylor)  wras 
about  to  charge.  Captain  McBlain  called  out,  'we  must  go  in 
with  those  troops ;  we  must  support  Taylor. '  I  called  this  to  Cap 
tain  Dimmick,  and  he  gave  the  order  to  assault." 

"The  cheer  was  taken  up  and  taken  up  again,  on  the  left,  and  in 
the  distance  it  rolled  on  and  on.  And  so  we  started.  Colonel 
Roosevelt,  of  the  Rough  Riders,  started  the  whole  movement  on 
the  left,  which  was  the  first  advance  of  the  assault." 

The  following  is  taken  from  my  notes  and  was  hastily  jotted 
down  on  the  field:  "The  Rough  Riders  came  in  line — Colonel 
Roosevelt  said  he  would  assault — Taylor  joined  them  with  his 
troop — McBlain  called  to  Dimmick,  'let  us  go,  we  must  go  to 
support  them.'  Dimmick  said  all  right — and  so,  with  no  orders, 
we  went  in." 

I  find  many  of  my  notes  are  illegible  from  perspiration.  My 
authority  for  saying  Taylor  went  in  with  you,  "joined  with  his 
troop"  was  the  word  passed  to  me  and  repeated  to  Captain  Dim 
mick  that  Taylor  was  about  to  charge  with  you.  I  could  not  see 
his  troop.  I  have  not  put  it  in  my  diary,  but  in  another  place 
I  have  noted  that  Colonel  Carrol,  who  was  acting  as  brigade  com 
mander,  told  me  to  ask  you  if  you  had  any  orders. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be, 

Very  respectfully, 

Your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  ANSON  BARBER, 
Captain  Twenty-Eighth  Infantry, 
(formerly  of  Ninth  Cavalry). 

HEADQUARTERS  PACIFIC  DIVISION, 
SAN  FRANCISCO,  CAL., 

May  11,  1905. 

DEAR  MR.  PRESIDENT:  As  some  discussion  has  arisen  in  the 
public  ^prints  regarding  the  battle  of  San  Juan,  Cuba,  July  1,  1898, 
and  your  personal  movements  during  that  day  Jiave  been  the  sub 
ject  of  comment,  it  may  not  be  amiss  in  -me  io  state  some  facts 
coming  under  my  personal  observation  as  Commanding  General 
of  the  Cavalry  Division,  of  which  your  regiment  formed  a  part. 
It  will,  perhaps,  be  advisable  to  show  first  how  I  came  to  be  in 
command,  in  order  that  my  statement  may  have  due  weight  as  an 
.authoritative  statement  of  facts:  I  was  .placed  in  command 


APPENDIX  267 

of  the  Cavalry  Division  on  the  afternoon  of  June  30th  by  General 
Shafter;  the  assignment  was  made  owing  to  the  severe  illness  of 
General  Wheeler,  who  was  the  permanent  commander  of  said 
Division.  Brigadier  General  Young,  who  commanded  the  Second 
Cavalry  Brigade,  of  which  your  regiment — the  First  Volunteer 
Cavalry — formed  a  part,  was  also  very  ill,  and  I  found  it  neces 
sary  to  relieve  him  from  command  and  place  Colonel  Wood,  of  the 
Hough  Riders,  in  command  of  the  Brigade;  this  change  placed 
you  in  command  of  your  regiment. 

The  Division  moved  from  its  camp  on  the  evening  of  June  30th, 
and  bivouacked  at  and  about  El  Poso.  I  saw  you  personally  in 
the  vicinity  of  El  Poso,  about  8  A.M.,  July  1st.  I  saw  you  again 
on  the  road  leading  from  El  Poso  to  the  San  Juan  River ;  you  were 
at  the  head  of  your  regiment,  which  was  leading  the  Second  Bri 
gade,  and  immediately  behind  the  rear  regiment  of  the  First  Bri 
gade.  My  orders  were  to  turn  to  the  right  at  San  Juan  River  and 
take  up  a  line  along  that  stream  and  try  and  connect  with  General 
Lawton,  who  was  to  engage  the  enemy  at  El  Caney.  On  reaching 
the  river  we  came  under  the  fire  of  the  Spanish  forces  posted  on 
San  Juan  Ridge  and  Kettle  Hill.  The  First  Brigade  was  faced  to 
the  front  in  line  as  soon  as  it  had  cleared  the  road,  and  the  Second 
Brigade  was  ordered  to  pass  in  rear  of  the  first  and  face  to  the  front 
when  clear  of  the  First  Brigade.  This  movement  was  very  diffi 
cult,  owing  to  the  heavy  undergrowth,  and  the  regiments  became 
more  or  less  tangled  up,  but  eventually  the  formation  was  accom 
plished,  and  the  Division  stood  in  an  irregular  line  along  the  San 
Juan  River,  the  Second  Brigade  on  the  right.  We  were  subjected 
to  a  heavy  fire  from  the  forces  on  San  Juan  Ridge  and  Kettle  Hill ; 
our  position  was  untenable,  and  it  became  necessary  to  assault  the 
enemy  or  fall  back.  Kettle  Hill  was  immediately  in  front  of  the 
Cavalry,  and  it  was  determined  to  assault  that  hill.  The  First 
Brigade  was  ordered  forward,  and  the  Second  Brigade  was  ordered 
to  support  the  attack;  personally,  I  accompanied  a  portion  of  the 
Tenth  Cavalry,  Second  Brigade,  and  the  Rough  Riders  were  to  the 
right.  This  brought  your  regiment  to  the  right  of  the  house  which 
was  at  the  summit  of  the  hill.  Shortly  after  I  reached  the  crest 
of  the  hill  you  came  to  me,  accompanied,  I  think,  by  Captain  C.  J. 
Stevens,  of  the  Ninth  Cavalry.  We  were  then  in  a  position  to  see 
the  line  of  intrenchments  along  San  Juan  Ridge,  and  could  see 
Kent's  Infantry  Division  engaged  on  our  left,  and  Hawkins '  as 
sault  against  Fort  San  Juan.  You  asked  me  for  permission  to 
move  forward  and  assault  San  Juan  Ridge.  I  gave  you  the  order 
in  person  to  move  forward,  and  I  saw  you  move  forward  and 
assault  San  Juan  Ridge  with  your  regiment  and  portions  of  the 
First  and  Tenth  Cavalry  belonginjg  to  your  .Brigade.  J  held  a 


268    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

portion  of  the  Second  Brigade  as  a  reserve  on  Kettle  Hill,  not 
knowing  what  force  the  enemy  might  have  in  reserve  behind  the 
ridge.  The  First  Brigade  also  moved  forward  and  assaulted  the 
ridge  to  the  right  of  Fort  San  Juan.  There  was  a  small  lake  be 
tween  Kettle  Hill  and  San  Juan  Ridge,  and  in  moving  forward 
your  command  passed  to  the  right  of  this  lake.  This  brought  you 
opposite  a  house  on  San  Juan  Ridge — not  Fort  San  Juan  proper, 
but  a  frame  house  surrounded  by  an  earthwork.  The  enemy  lost  a 
number  of  men  at  this  point,  whose  bodies  lay  in  the  trenches. 
Later  in  the  day  I  rode  along  the  line,  and,  as  I  recall  it,  a  portion 
of  the  Tenth  Cavalry  was  immediately  about  this  house,  and  your 
regiment  occupied  an  irregular  semi-circular  position  along  the 
ridge  and  immediately  to  the  right  of  the  house.  You  had  pickets 
out  to  your  front;  and  several  hundred  yards  to  your  front  the 
Spaniards  had  a  heavy  outpost  occupying  a  house,  with  rifle  pits 
surrounding  it.  Later  in  the  day,  and  during  the  following  day, 
the  various  regiments  forming  the  Division  were  rearranged  and 
brought  into  tactical  formation,  the  First  Brigade  on  the  left  and 
immediately  to  the  right  of  Fort  San  Juan,  and  the  Second  Brigade 
on  the  right  of  the  First. 

This  was  the  position  occupied  by  the  Cavalry  Division  until  the 
final  surrender  of  the  Spanish  forces,  on  July  17,  1898. 

In  conclusion  allow  me  to  say,  that  I  saw  you,  personally,  at 
about  8  A.M.,  at  El  Poso;  later,  on  the  road  to  San  Juan  River; 
later,  on  the  summit  of  Kettle  Hill,  immediately  after  its  capture 
by  the  Cavalry  Division.  I  saw  you  move  forward  with  your 
command  to  assault  San  Juan  Ridge,  and  I  saw  you  on  San  Juan 
Ridge,  where  we  visited  your  line  together,  and  you  explained  to 
me  the  disposition  of  your  command. 

I  am,  sir,  with  much  respect, 

Your  obedient  servant, 

SAMUEL  S.  SUMNER, 
Major-General  United  States  Army. 


CHAPTER   VHI 

THE    NEW   YORK   GOVERNORSHIP 

IN  September,  1898,  the  First  Volunteer  Cavalry,  in  com 
pany  with  most  of  the  rest  of  the  Fifth  Army  Corps,  was 
disembarked  at  Montauk  Point.  Shortly  after  it  was  dis 
banded,  and  a  few  days  later,  I  was  nominated  for  Governor 
of  New  York  by  the  Republican  party.  Timothy  L.  Wood 
ruff  was  nominated  for  Lieutenant-Governor.  He  was  my 
stanch  friend  throughout  the  term  of  our  joint  service. 

The  previous  year,  the  machine  or  standpat  Republicans, 
who  were  under  the  domination  of  Senator  Platt,  had  come 
to  a  complete  break  with  the  anti-machine  element  over  the 
New  York  mayoralty.  This  had  brought  the  Republican 
party  to  a  smash,  not  only  in  New  York  City,  but  in  the 
State,  where  the  Democratic  candidate  for  Chief  Judge 
of  the  Court  of  Appeals,  Alton  B.  Parker,  was  elected  by 
sixty  or  eighty  thousand  majority.  Mr.  Parker  was  an 
able  man,  a  lieutenant  of  Mr.  Hill's,  standing  close  to  the 
conservative  Democrats  of  the  Wall  Street  type.  These 
conservative  Democrats  were  planning  how  to  wrest  the 
Democratic  party  from  the  control  of  Mr.  Bryan.  They 
hailed  Judge  Parker 's  victory  as  a  godsend.  The  Judge  at 
once  loomed  up  as  a  Presidential  possibility,  and  was  care 
fully  groomed  for  the  position  by  the  New  York  Democratic 
machine,  and  its  financial  allies  in  the  New  York  business 
world. 

The  Republicans  realized  that  the  chances  were  very 
much  against  them.  Accordingly  the  leaders  were  in  a 
chastened  mood  and  ready  to  nominate  any  candidate  with 
whom  they  thought  there  was  a  chance  of  winning.  I  was 
the  only  possibility,  and,  accordingly,  under  pressure  from 
certain  of  the  leaders  who  recognized  this  fact,  and  who 


270    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

responded  to  popular  pressure,  Senator  Platt  picked  me 
for  the  nomination.  He  was  entirely  frank  in  the  matter. 
He  made  no  pretense  that  he  liked  me  personally;  but  he 
deferred  to  the  judgment  of  those  who  insisted  that  I  was 
the  only  man  who  could  be  elected,  and  that  therefore  I  had 
to  be  nominated. 

Foremost  among  the  leaders  who  pressed  me  on  Mr. 
Platt  (who  "pestered"  him  about  me,  to  use  his  own  words) 
were  Mr.  Quigg,  Mr.  Odell — then  State  Chairman  of  the 
Eepublican  organization,  and  afterwards  Governor — and 
Mr.  Hazel,  now  United  States  Judge.  Judge  Hazel  did  not 
know  me  personally,  but  felt  that  the  sentiment  in  his  city, 
Buffalo,  demanded  my  nomination,  and  that  the  then  Re 
publican  Governor,  Mr.  Black,  could  not  be  reflected.  Mr. 
Odell,  who  hardly  knew  me  personally,  felt  the  same  way 
about  Mr.  Black's  chances,  and,  as  he  had  just  taken  the 
State  Chairmanship,  he  was  very  anxious  to  win  a  victory. 
Mr.  Quigg  knew  me  quite  well  personally;  he  had  been  in 
touch  with  me  for  years,  while  he  was  a  reporter  on  the 
Tribune,  and  also  wThen  he  edited  a  paper  in  Montana ;  he 
had  been  on  good  terms  with  me  while  he  was  in  Congress 
and  I  was  Civil  Service  Commissioner,  meeting  me  often 
in  company  with  my  especial  cronies  in  Congress — men  like 
Lodge,  Speaker  Tom  Reed,  Greenhalge,  Butterworth  and 
Bolliver — and  he  had  urged  my  appointment  as  Police 
Commissioner  on  Mayor  Strong. 

i  It  was  Mr.  Quigg  who  called  on  me  at  Montauk  Point  to 
sound  me  about  the  Governorship;  Mr.  Platt  being  by  no 
means  enthusiastic  over  Mr.  Quigg 's  mission,  largely  be 
cause  he  disapproved  of  the  Spanish  War  and  of  my  part 
in  bringing  it  about.  Mr.  Quigg  saw  me  in  my  tent,  in  which 
he  spent  a  couple  of  hours  with  me,  my  brother-in-law, 
Douglas  Robinson,  being  also  present.  Quigg  spoke  very 
frankly  to  me,  stating  that  he  earnestly  desired  to  see  me 
nominated  and  believed  that  the  great  body  of  Republican 
voters  in  the  State  so  desired,  but  that  the  organization  and 
the  State  Convention  would  finally  do  what  Senator  Platt 
desired.  He  said  that  county  leaders  were  already  coming 


THE   NEW   YORK   GOVERNORSHIP  271 

to  Senator  Platt,  hinting  at  a  close  election,  expressing 
doubt  of  Governor  Black's  availability  for  reelection,  and 
asking  why  it  would  not  be  a  good  thing  to  nominate  me ; 
that  now  that  I  had  returned  to  the  United  States  this  would 
go  on  more  and  more  all  the  time,  and  that  he  (Quigg)  did 
not  wish  that  these  men  should  be  discouraged  and  be  sent 
back  to  their  localities  to  suppress  a  rising  sentiment  in  my 
favor.  For  this  reason  he  said  that  he  wanted  from  me  a 
plain  statement  as  to  whether  or  not  I  wanted  the  nomina 
tion,  and  as  to  what  would  be  my  attitude  toward  the  organ 
ization  in  the  event  of  my  nomination  and  election,  whether 
or  not  I  would  "make  war"  on  Mr.  Platt  and  his  friends,  or 
whether  I  would  confer  with  them  and  with  the  organiza 
tion  leaders  generally,  and  give  fair  consideration  to  their 
point  of  view  as  to  party  policy  and  public  interest.  He  said 
he  had  not  come  to  make  me  any  offer  of  the  nomination, 
and  had  no  authority  to  do  so,  nor  to  get  any  pledges  or 
promises.  He  simply  wanted  a  frank  definition  of  my  atti 
tude  towards  existing  party  conditions. 

To  this  I  replied  that  I  should  like  to  be  nominated,  and 
if  nominated  would  promise  to  throw  myself  into  the  cam 
paign  with  all  possible  energy.  I  said  that  I  should  not 
make  war  on  Mr.  Platt  or  anybody  else  if  war  could  be 
avoided;  that  what  I  wanted  was  to  be  Governor  and  not 
a  faction  leader ;  that  I  certainly  would  confer  with  the  or 
ganization  men,  as  with  everybody  else  who  seemed  to  me  to 
have  knowledge  of  and  interest  in  public  affairs,  and  that  as 
to  Mr.  Platt  and  the  organization  leaders,  I  would  do  so  in 
the  sincere  hope  that  there  might  always  result  harmony  of 
opinion  and  purpose ;  but  that  while  I  would  try  to  get  on 
well  with  the  organization,  the  organization  must  with  equal 
sincerity  strive  to  do  what  I  regarded  as  essential  for  the 
public  good ;  and  that  in  every  case,  after  full  consideration 
of  what  everybody  had  to  say  who  might  possess  real 
knowledge  of  the  matter,  I  should  have  to  act  finally  as  my 
own  judgment  and  conscience  dictated  and  administer  the 
State  government  as  I  thought  it  ought  to  be  administered. 
Quigg  said  that  this  was  precisely  what  he  supposed  I 


272    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

would  say,  that  it  was  all  anybody  could  expect,  and  that  he 
would  state  it  to  Senator  Platt  precisely  as  I  had  put  it  to 
him,  which  he  accordingly  did ;  and,  throughout  my  term  as 
Governor,  Quigg  lived  loyally  up  to  our  understanding.1 

After  being  nominated,  I  made  a  hard  and  aggressive 
campaign  through  the  State.  My  opponent  was  a  respect 
able  man,  a  judge,  behind  whom  stood  Mr.  Croker,  the  boss 
of  Tammany  Hall.  My  object  was  to  make  the  people 
understand  that  it  was  Croker,  and  not  the  nominal  candi 
date,  who  was  my  real  opponent ;  that  the  choice  lay  between 
Crokerism  and  myself.  Croker  was  a  powerful  and  trucu 
lent  man,  the  autocrat  of  his  organization,  and  of  a  domi 
neering  nature.  For  his  own  reasons  he  insisted  upon 
Tammany's  turning  down  an  excellent  Democratic  judge 
who  was  a  candidate  for  reelection.  This  gave  me  my 
chance.  Under  my  attack,  Croker,  who  was  a  stalwart  fight 
ing  man  and  who  would  not  take  an  attack  tamely,  himself 
came  to  the  front.  I  was  able  to  fix  the  contest  in  the  public 
mind  as  one  between  himself  and  myself;  and,  against  all 
probabilities,  I  won  by  the  rather  narrow  margin  of  eigh 
teen  thousand  plurality. 

As  I  have  already  said,  there  is  a  lunatic  fringe  to  every 
reform  movement.  At  least  nine-tenths  of  all  the  sincere 
reformers  supported  me;  but  the  ultra-pacificists,  the  so- 
called  anti-imperialists,  or  anti-militarists,  or  peace-at-any- 
price  men,  preferred  Croker  to  me;  and  another  knot  of 
extremists  who  had  at  first  ardently  insisted  that  I  must  be 
"forced"  on  Platt,  as  soon  as  Platt  supported  me  them 
selves  opposed  me  because  he  supported  me.  After  election 
John  Hay  wrote  me  as  follows :  "While  you  are  Governor, 
I  believe  the  party  can  be  made  solid  as  never  before.  You 
have  already  shown  that  a  man  may  be  absolutely  honest 
and  yet  practical ;  a  reformer  by  instinct  and  a  wise  politi- 

i  In  a  letter  to  me  Mr.  Quigg  states,  what  I  had  forgotten,  that  I  told  him 
to  tell  the  Senator  that  while  I  would  talk  freely  with  him,  and  had  no  inten 
tion  of  becoming  a  factional  leader  with  a  personal  organization,  yet  that  I 
must  have  direct  personal  relations  with  everybody,  and  get  their  views  at 
first  hand  whenever  I  so  desired,  because  I  could  not  have  one  man  speaking 
for  all. 


Copyright  by  Arthur  Hewitt. 

THEODORE  ROOSEVELT,  GOVERNOR  or  NEW  YORK  STATE. 


THE    NEW   YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  273 

clan ;  brave,  bold,  and  uncompromising,  and  yet  not  a  wild 
ass  of  the  desert.  The  exhibition  made  by  the  professional 
independents  in  voting  against  you  for  no  reason  on  earth 
except  that  somebody  else  was  voting  for  you,  is  a  lesson 
that  is  worth  its  cost." 

At  that  time  boss  rule  was  at  its  very  zenith.  Mr.  Bryan's 
candidacy  in  1896  on  a  free  silver  platform  had  threatened 
such  frightful  business  disaster  as  to  make  the  business 
men,  the  wage-workers,  and  the  professional  classes  gen 
erally,  turn  eagerly  to  the  Eepublican  party.  East  of  the 
Mississippi  the  Eepublican  vote  for  Mr.  McKinley  was 
larger  by  far  than  it  had  been  for  Abraham  Lincoln  in  the 
days  when  the  life  of  the  Nation  was  at  stake.  Mr.  Bryan 
championed  many  sorely  needed  reforms  in  the  interest  of 
the  plain  people ;  but  many  of  his  platform  proposals,  eco 
nomic  and  otherwise,  were  of  such  a  character  that  to  have 
put  them  into  practice  would  have  meant  to  plunge  all  our 
people  into  conditions  far  worse  than  any  of  those  for  which 
he  sought  a  remedy.  The  free  silver  advocates  included  sin 
cere  and  upright  men  who  were  able  to  make  a  strong  case 
for  their  position ;  but  with  them  and  dominating  them  were 
all  the  believers  in  the  complete  or  partial  repudiation  of 
National,  State,  and  private  debts;  and  not  only  the  busi 
ness  men  but  the  workingmen  grew  to  feel  that  under  these 
circumstances  too  heavy  a  price  could  not  be  paid  to  avert 
the  Democratic  triumph.  The  fear  of  Mr.  Bryan  threw 
almost  all  the  leading  men  of  all  classes  into  the  arms  of 
whoever  opposed  him. 

The  Eepublican  bosses,  who  were  already  very  powerful, 
and  who  were  already  in  fairly  close  alliance  with  the  privi 
leged  interests,  now  found  everything  working  to  their 
advantage.  Good  and  high-minded  men  of  conservative 
temperament  in  their  panic  played  into  the  hands  of  the 
ultra-reactionaries  of  business  and  politics.  The  alliance 
between  the  two  kinds  of  privilege,  political  and  financial, 
was  closely  cemented ;  and  wherever  there  was  any  attempt 
to  break  it  up,  the  cry  was  at  once  raised  that  this  merely 
.represented  another  phase  of  the  assault  on  National  hon- 


274    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

esty  and  individual  and  mercantile  integrity.  As  so  often 
happens,  the  excesses  and  threats  of  an  unwise  and  extreme 
radicalism  had  resulted  in  immensely  strengthening  the 
position  of  the  beneficiaries  of  reaction.  This  was  the  era 
when  the  Standard  Oil  Company  achieved  a  mastery  of 
Pennsylvania  politics  so  far-reaching  and  so  corrupt  that 
it  is  difficult  to  describe  it  without  seeming  to  exaggerate. 
In  New  York  State,  United  States  Senator  Platt  was  the 
absolute  boss  of  the  Eepublican  party.  ' '  Big  business ' '  was 
back  of  him ;  yet  at  the  time  this,  the  most  important  ele 
ment  in  his  strength,  was  only  imperfectly  understood.  It 
was  not  until  I  was  elected  Governor  that  I  myself  came  to 
understand  it.  "We  were  still  accustomed  to  talking  of  the 
" machine"  as  if  it  were  something  merely  political,  with 
which  business  had  nothing  to  do.  Senator  Platt  did  not 
use  his  political  position  to  advance  his  private  fortunes — 
therein  differing  absolutely  from  many  other  political 
bosses.  He  lived  in  hotels  and  had  few  extravagant  tastes. 
Indeed,  I  could  not  find  that  he  had  any  tastes  at  all  except 
for  politics,  and  on  rare  occasions  for  a  very  dry  theology 
wholly  divorced  from  moral  implications.  But  big  business 
men  contributed  to  him  large  sums  of  money,  which  enabled 
him  to  keep  his  grip  on  the  machine  and  secured  for  them 
the  help  of  the  machine  if  they  were  threatened  with  ad 
verse  legislation.  The  contributions  were  given  in  the  guise 
of  contributions  for  campaign  purposes,  of  money  for  the 
good  of  the  party ;  when  the  money  was  contributed  there 
was  rarely  talk  of  specific  favors  in  return.1  It  was  simply 
put  into  Mr.  Platt 's  hands  and  treated  by  him  as  in  the 
campaign  chest.  Then  he  distributed  it  in  the  districts 
where  it  was  most  needed  by  the  candidates  and  organiza- 

lEach  nation  has  its  own  pet  sins  to  which  it  is  merciful  and  also  sins 
which  it  treats  as  moat  abhorrent.  In  America  we  are  peculiarly  sensitive 
about  big  money  contributions  for  which  the  donors  expect  any  reward.  In 
England,  where  in  some  ways  the  standard  is  higher  than  here,  such  con 
tributions  are  accepted  as  a  matter  of  course,  nay,  as  one  of  the  methods 
by  which  wealthy  men  obtain  peerages.  It  would  be  well-nigh  an  impossi 
bility  for  a  man  to  secure  a  seat  in  the  United  States  Senate  by  mere  cam 
paign  contributions,  in  the  way  that  seats  in  the  British  House  of  Lords  have 
often  been  secured  without  any  scandal  being  caused  thereby. 


THE   NEW   YORK   GOVERNORSHIP  275 

tion  leaders.  Ordinarily  no  pledge  was  required  from  the 
latter  to  the  bosses,  any  more  than  it  was  required  by  the 
business  men  from  Mr.  Platt  or  his  lieutenants.  No  pledge 
was  needed.  It  was  all  a  "gentlemen's  understanding." 
As  the  Senator  once  said  to  me,  if  a  man's  character  was 
such  that  it  was  necessary  to  get  a  promise  from  him,  it 
was  clear  proof  that  his  character  was  such  that  the  promise 
would  not  be  worth  anything  after  it  was  made. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  some  of  the  worst  practices 
of  the  machine  in  dealings  of  this  kind  represented  merely 
virtues  in  the  wrong  place,  virtues  wrenched  out  of  proper 
relation  to  their  surroundings.  A  man  in  a  doubtful  dis 
trict  might  win  only  because  of  the  help  Mr.  Platt  gave 
him;  he  might  be  a  decent  young  fellow  without  money 
enough  to  finance  his  own  campaign,  who  was  able  to  fi 
nance  it  only  because  Platt  of  his  own  accord  found  out  or 
was  apprised  of  his  need  and  advanced  the  money.  Such  a 
man  felt  grateful,  and,  because  of  his  good  qualities,  joined 
with  the  purely  sordid  and  corrupt  heelers  and  crooked 
politicians  to  become  part  of  the  Platt  machine.  In  his 
turn  Mr.  Platt  was  recognized  by  the  business  men,  the  big 
contributors,  as  an  honorable  man;  not  only  a  man  of  his 
word,  but  a  man  who,  whenever  he  received  a  favor,  could 
be  trusted  to  do  his  best  to  repay  it  on  any  occasion  that 
arose.  I  believe  that  usually  the  contributors,  and  the  re 
cipient,  sincerely  felt  that  the  transaction  was  proper  and 
subserved  the  cause  of  good  politics  and  good  business; 
and,  indeed,  as  regards  the  major  part  of  the  contributions, 
it  is  probable  that  this  was  the  fact,  and  that  the  only  criti 
cism  that  could  properly  be  made  about  the  contributions 
was  that  they  were  not  made  with  publicity — and  at  that 
time  neither  the  parties  nor  the  public  had  any  realization 
that  publicity  was  necessary,  or  any  adequate  understand 
ing  of  the  dangers  of  the  "invisible  empire"  which  throve 
by  what  was  done  in  secrecy.  Many,  probably  most,  of  the 
contributors  of  this  type  never  wished  anything  personal 
in  exchange  for  their  contributions,  and  made  them  with 
sincere  patriotism,  desiring  in  return  only  that  the  Gov- 


276    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

eminent  should  be  conducted  on  a  proper  basis.  Unfortu 
nately,  it  was,  in  practice,  exceedingly  difficult  to  distin 
guish  these  men  from  the  others  who  contributed  big  sums 
to  the  various  party  bosses  with  the  expectation  of  gaming 
concrete  and  personal  advantages  (in  which  the  bosses 
shared)  at  the  expense  of  the  general  public.  It  was  very 
hard  to  draw  the  line  between  these  two  types  of  contribu 
tions. 

There  was  but  one  kind  of  money  contribution  as  to  which 
it  seemed  to  me  absolutely  impossible  for  either  the  con 
tributor  or  the  recipient  to  disguise  to  themselves  the  evil 
meaning  of  the  contribution.  This  was  where  a  big  corpora 
tion  contributed  to  both  political  parties.  I  knew  of  one 
such  case  where  in  a  State  campaign  a  big  corporation 
which  had  many  dealings  with  public  officials  frankly  con 
tributed  in  the  neighborhood  of  a  hundred  thousand  dollars 
to  one  campaign  fund  and  fifty  thousand  dollars  to  the  cam 
paign  fund  of  the  other  side — and,  I  believe,  made  some 
further  substantial  contributions  in  the  same  ratio  of  two 
dollars  to  one  side  for  every  one  dollar  given  to  the  other. 
The  contributors  were  Democrats,  and  the  big  contributions 
went  to  the  Democratic  managers.  The  Eepublican  was 
elected,  and  after  his  election,  when  a  matter  came  up  af 
fecting  the  company,  in  which  its  interests  were  hostile 
to  those  of  the  general  public,  the  successful  candidate, 
then  holding  a  high  State  office,  was  approached  by  his  cam 
paign  managers  and  the  situation  put  frankly  before  him. 
He  was  less  disturbed  than  astonished,  and  remarked, 
"Why,  I  thought  So-and-so  and  his  associates  were  Demo 
crats  and  subscribed  to  the  Democratic  campaign  fund." 
"So  they  did,"  was  the  answer;  "they  subscribed  to  them 
twice  as  much  as  they  subscribed  to  us,  but  if  they  had  had 
any  idea  that  you  intended  doing  what  you  now  say  you 
will  do,  they  would  have  subscribed  it  all  to  the  other  side, 
and  more  too."  The  State  official  in  his  turn  answered  that 
he  was  very  sorry  if  any  one  had  subscribed  under  a  mis 
apprehension,  that  it  was  no  fault  of  his,  for  he  had  stated 
definitely  and  clearly  his  position,  that  he  of  course  had  no 


THE    NEW   YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  277 

money  wherewith  himself  to  return  what  without  his  knowl 
edge  had  been  contributed,  and  that  all  he  could  say  was 
that  any  man  who  had  subscribed  to  his  campaign  fund 
under  the  impression  that  the  receipt  of  the  subscription 
would  be  a  bar  to  the  performance  of  public  duty  was  sadly 
mistaken. 

The  control  by  Mr.  Platt  and  his  lieutenants  over  the 
organization  was  well-nigh  complete.  There  were  splits 
among  the  bosses,  and  insurgent  movements  now  and  then, 
but  the  ordinary  citizens  had  no  control  over  the  political 
machinery  except  in  a  very  few  districts.  There  were,  how 
ever,  plenty  of  good  men  in  politics,  men  who  either  came 
from  districts  where  there  was  popular  control,  or  who  rep 
resented  a  genuine  aspiration  towards  good  citizenship  on 
the  part  of  some  boss  or  group  of  bosses,  or  else  who  had 
been  nominated  frankly  for  reasons  of  expediency  by  bosses 
whose  attitude  towards  good  citizenship  was  at  best  one  of 
Gallio-like  indifference.  At  the  time  when  I  was  nominated 
for  Governor,  as  later  when  Mr.  Hughes  was  nominated  and 
renominated  for  Governor,  there  was  no  possibility  of  secur 
ing  the  nomination  unless  the  bosses  permitted  it.  In  each 
case  the  bosses,  the  machine  leaders,  took  a  man  for  whom 
they  did  not  care,  because  he  was  the  only  man  with  whom 
they  could  win.  In  the  case  of  Mr.  Hughes  there  was  of 
course  also  the  fact  of  pressure  from  the  National  Admin 
istration.  But  the  bosses  were  never  overcome  in  a  fair 
fight,  when  they  had  made  up  their  minds  to  fight,  until  the 
Saratoga  Convention  in  1910,  when  Mr.  Stimson  was  nomi 
nated  for  Governor. 

Senator  Platt  had  the  same  inborn  capacity  for  the  kind 
of  politics  which  he  liked  that  many  big  Wall  Street  men 
have  shown  for  not  wholly  dissimilar  types  of  finance.  It 
was  his  chief  interest,  and  he  applied  himself  to  it  unre 
mittingly.  He  handled  his  private  business  successfully; 
but  it  was  politics  in  which  he  was  absorbed,  and  he  con 
cerned  himself  therewith  every  day  in  the  year.  He  had 
built  up  an  excellent  system  of  organization,  and  the  neces 
sary  funds  came  from  corporations  and  men  of  wealth  who 


278    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

contributed  as  I  have  described  above.  The  majority  of 
the  men  with  a  natural  capacity  for  organization  leadership 
of  the  type  which  has  generally  been  prevalent  in  New 
York  politics  turned  to  Senator  Platt  as  their  natural  chief 
and  helped  build  up  the  organization,  until  under  his  leader 
ship  it  became  more  powerful  and  in  a  position  of  greater 
control  than  any  other  Republican  machine  in  the  country, 
excepting  in  Pennsylvania.  The  Democratic  machines  in 
some  of  the  big  cities,  as  in  New  York  and  Boston,  and  the 
country  Democratic  machine  of  New  York  under  David  B. 
Hill,  were  probably  even  more  efficient,  representing  an 
even  more  complete  mastery  by  the  bosses,  and  an  even 
greater  degree  of  drilled  obedience  among  the  henchmen. 
It  would  be  an  entire  mistake  to  suppose  that  Mr.  Platt 's 
lieutenants  were  either  all  bad  men  or  all  influenced  by  un 
worthy  motives.  He  was  constantly  doing  favors  for  men. 
He  had  won  the  gratitude  of  many  good  men.  In  the  coun 
try  districts  especially,  there  were  many  places  where  his 
machine  included  the  majority  of  the  best  citizens,  the  lead 
ing  and  substantial  citizens,  among  the  inhabitants.  Some 
of  his  strongest  and  most  efficient  lieutenants  were  disin 
terested  men  of  high  character. 

There  had  always  been  a  good  deal  of  opposition  to  Mr. 
Platt  and  the  machine,  but  the  leadership  of  this  opposition 
was  apt  to  be  found  only  among  those  whom  Abraham 
Lincoln  called  the  "silk  stockings,"  and  much  of  it  excited 
almost  as  much  derision  among  the  plain  people  as  the  ma 
chine  itself  excited  anger  or  dislike.  Very  many  of  Mr. 
Platt 's  opponents  really  disliked  him  and  his  methods,  for 
aesthetic  rather  than  for  moral  reasons,  and  the  bulk  of  the 
people  half -consciously  felt  this  and  refused  to  submit  to 
their  leadership.  The  men  who  opposed  him  in  this  manner 
were  good  citizens  according  to  their  lights,  prominent  in 
the  social  clubs  and  in  philanthropic  circles,  men  of  means 
and  often  men  of  business  standing.  They  disliked  coarse 
and  vulgar  politicians,  and  they  sincerely  reprobated  all  the 
shortcomings  that  were  recognized  by,  and  were  offensive 
to,  people  of  their  own  caste.  They  had  not  the  slightest 


THE    NEW   YORK   GOVERNORSHIP  279 

understanding  of  the  needs,  interests,  ways  of  thought,  and 
convictions  of  the  average  small  man;  and  the  small  man 
felt  this,  although  he  could  not  express  it,  and  sensed  that 
they  were  really  not  concerned  with  his  welfare,  and  that 
they  did  not  offer  him  anything  materially  better  from  his 
point  of  view  than  the  machine. 

When  reformers  of  this  type  attempted  to  oppose  Mr. 
Platt,  they  usually  put  up  either  some  rather  inefficient, 
well-meaning  person,  who  bathed  every  day,  and  didn't 
steal,  but  whose  only  good  point  was  "respectability,"  and 
who  knew  nothing  of  the  great  fundamental  questions 
looming  before  us ;  or  else  they  put  up  some  big  business 
man  or  corporation  lawyer  who  was  wedded  to  the  gross 
wrong  and  injustice  of  our  economic  system,  and  who 
neither  by  personality  nor  by  programme  gave  the  ordinary 
plain  people  any  belief  that  there  was  promise  of  vital  good 
to  them  in  the  change.  The  correctness  of  their  view  was 
proved  by  the  fact  that  as  soon  as  fundamental  economic 
and  social  reforms  were  at  stake  the  aesthetic,  as  distin 
guished  from  the  genuinely  moral,  reformers,  for  the  most 
part  sided  with  the  bosses  against  the  people. 

When  I  became  Governor,  the  conscience  of  the  people 
was  in  no  way  or  shape  aroused,  as  it  has  since  become 
roused.  The  people  accepted  and  practiced  in  a  matter-of- 
course  way  as  quite  proper  things  which  they  would  not  now 
tolerate.  They  had  no  definite  and  clearly  outlined  con 
ception  of  what  they  wished  in  the  way  of  reform.  They 
on  the  whole  tolerated,  and  indeed  approved  of,  the  ma 
chine;  and  there  had  been  no  development  on  any  consid 
erable  scale  of  reformers  with  the  vision  to  see  what  the 
needs  of  the  people  were,  and  the  high  purpose  sanely  to 
achieve  what  was  necessary  in  order  to  meet  these  needs. 
I  knew  both  the  machine  and  the  silk-stocking  reformers 
fairly  well,  from  many  years'  close  association  with  them. 
The  machine  as  such  had  no  ideals  at  all,  although  many 
of  the  men  composing  it  did  have.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
ideals  of  very  many  of  the  silk-stocking  reformers  did  not 
relate  to  the  questions  of  real  and  vital  interest  to  our  peo- 


280    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

pie ;  and,  singularly  enough,  in  international  matters,  these 
same  silk-stockings  were  no  more  to  be  trusted  than  the 
average  ignorant  demagogue  or  shortsighted  spoils  poli 
ticians.  I  felt  that  these  men  would  be  broken  reeds  to 
which  to  trust  in  any  vital  contest  for  betterment  of  social 
and  industrial  conditions. 

I  had  neither  the  training  nor  the  capacity  that  would 
have  enabled  me  to  match  Mr.  Platt  and  his  machine  people 
on  their  own  ground.  Nor  did  I  believe  that  the  effort  to 
build  up  a  machine  of  my  own  under  the  then  existing  condi 
tions  would  meet  the  needs  of  the  situation  so  far  as  the  peo 
ple  were  concerned.  I  therefore  made  no  effort  to  create 
a  machine  of  my  own,  and  consistently  adopted  the  plan  of 
going  over  the  heads  of  the  men  holding  public  office  and  of 
the  men  in  control  of  the  organization,  and  appealing  di 
rectly  to  the  people  behind  them.  The  machine,  for  in 
stance,  had  a  more  or  less  strong  control  over  the  great 
bulk  of  the  members  of  the  State  Legislature ;  but  in  the  last 
resort  the  people  behind  these  legislators  had  a  still  greater 
control  over  them.  I  made  up  my  mind  that  the  only  way 
I  could  beat  the  bosses  whenever  the  need  to  do  so  arose 
(and  unless  there  was  such  need  I  did  not  wish  to  try)  was, 
not  by  attempting  to  manipulate  the  machinery,  and  not 
by  trusting  merely  to  the  professional  reformers,  but  by 
making  my  appeal  as  directly  and  as  emphatically  as  I 
knew  how  to  the  mass  of  voters  themselves,  to  the  people, 
to  the  men  who  if  waked  up  would  be  able  to  impose  their 
will  on  their  representatives.  My  success  depended  upon 
getting  the  people  in  the  different  districts  to  look  at  mat 
ters  in  my  way,  and  getting  them  to  take  such  an  active 
interest  in  affairs  as  to  enable  them  to  exercise  control  over 
their  representatives. 

There  were  a  few  of  the  Senators  and  Assemblymen  whom 
I  could  reach  by  seeing  them  personally  and  putting  before 
them  my  arguments ;  but  most  of  them  were  too  much 
under  the  control  of  the  machine  for  me  to  shake  them  loose 
unless  they  knew  that  the  people  wore  actively  behind  me. 
In  making  my  appeal  to  the  people  as  a  whole  I  was  dealing 


THE    NEW   YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  281 

with  an  entirely  different  constituency  from  that  which, 
especially  in  the  big  cities,  liked  to  think  of  itself  as  the 
"better  element/'  the  particular  exponent  of  reform  and 
good  citizenship.  I  was  dealing  with  shrewd,  hard-headed, 
kindly  men  and  women,  chiefly  concerned  with  the  absorb 
ing  work  of  earning  their  own  living,  and  impatient  of  fads, 
who  had  grown  to  feel  that  the  associations  with  the  word 
"reformer"  were  not  much  better  than  the  associations 
with  the  word  "politician."  I  had  to  convince  these  men 
and  women  of  my  good  faith,  and,  moreover,  of  my  common 
sense  and  efficiency.  They  were  most  of  them  strong  parti 
sans,  and  an  outrage  had  to  be  very  real  and  very  great  to 
shake  them  even  partially  loose  from  their  party  affiliations. 
Moreover,  they  took  little  interest  in  any  fight  of  mere  per 
sonalities.  They  were  not  influenced  in  the  least  by  the  silk- 
stocking  reform  view  of  Mr.  Platt.  I  knew  that  if  they  were 
persuaded  that  I  was  engaged  in  a  mere  faction  fight 
against  him,  that  it  was  a  mere  issue  between  his  ambition 
and  mine,  they  would  at  once  become  indifferent,  and  my 
fight  would  be  lost. 

But  I  felt  that  I  could  count  on  their  support  wherever 
I  could  show  them  that  the  fight  was  not  made  just  for  the 
sake  of  the  row,  that  it  was  not  made  merely  as  a  factional 
contest  against  Senator  Platt  and  the  organization,  but  was 
waged  from  a  sense  of  duty  for  real  and  tangible  causes 
such  as  the  promotion  of  governmental  efficiency  and  hon 
esty,  and  forcing  powerful  moneyed  men  to  take  the  proper 
attitude  toward  the  community  at  large.  They  stood  by  me 
when  I  insisted  upon  having  the  canal  department,  the  in 
surance  department,  and  the  various  departments  of  the 
State  Government  run  with  efficiency  and  honesty;  they 
stood  by  me  when  I  insisted  upon  making  wealthy  men  who 
owned  franchises  pay  the  State  what  they  properly  ought 
to  pay;  they  stood  by  me  when,  in  connection  with  the 
strikes  on  the  Croton  Aqueduct  and  in  Buffalo,  I  promptly 
used  the  military  power  of  the  State  to  put  a  stop  to  rioting 
and  violence. 

Tn  the  latter  case  my  chief  opponents  and  critics  were 


282    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

local  politicians  who  were  truckling  to  the  labor  vote ;  but 
in  all  cases  coming  under  the  first  two  categories  I  had  se 
rious  trouble  with  the  State  leaders  of  the  machine.  I  al 
ways  did  my  best,  in  good  faith,  to  get  Mr.  Platt  and  the 
other  heads  of  the  machine  to  accept  my  views,  and  to  con 
vince  them,  by  repeated  private  conversations,  that  I  was 
right.  I  never  wantonly  antagonized  or  humiliated  them. 
I  did  not  wish  to  humiliate  them  or  to  seem  victorious  over 
them ;  what  I  wished  was  to  secure  the  things  that  I  thought 
it  essential  to  the  men  and  women  of  the  State  to  secure. 
If  I  could  finally  persuade  them  to  support  me,  well  and 
good;  in  such  case  I  continued  to  work  with  them  in  the 
friendliest  manner. 

If  after  repeated  and  persistent  effort  I  failed  to  get  them 
to  support  me,  then  I  made  a  fair  fight  in  the  open,  and  in  a 
majority  of  cases  I  carried  my  point  and  succeeded  in  get 
ting  through  the  legislation  which  I  wished.  In  theory  the 
Executive  has  nothing  to  do  with  legislation.  In  practice, 
as  things  now  are,  the  Executive  is  or  ought  to  be  peculiarly 
representative  of  the  people  as  a  whole.  As  often  as  not  the 
action  of  the  Executive  offers  the  only  means  by  which  the 
people  can  get  the  legislation  they  demand  and  ought  to 
have.  Therefore  a  good  executive  under  the  present  con 
ditions  of  American  political  life  must  take  a  very  active 
interest  in  getting  the  right  kind  of  legislation,  in  addition 
to  performing  his  executive  duties  with  an  eye  single  to  the 
public  welfare.  More  than  half  of  my  work  as  Governor 
was  in  the  direction  of  getting  needed  and  important  legis 
lation.  I  accomplished  this  only  by  arousing  the  people, 
and  riveting  their  attention  on  what  was  done. 

Gradually  the  people  began  to  wake  up  more  and  more 
to  the  fact  that  the  machine  politicians  were  not  giving 
them  the  kind  of  government  which  they  wished.  As  this 
waking  up  grew  more  general,  not  merely  in  New  York  or 
any  other  one  State,  but  throughout  most  of  the  Nation,  the 
power  of  the  bosses  waned.  Then  a  curious  thing  happened. 
The  professional  reformers  who  had  most  loudly  criticized 
these  bosses  began  to  change  toward  them.  Newspaper 


THE    NEW   YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  283 

editors,  college  presidents,  corporation  lawyers,  and  big 
business  men,  all  alike,  had  denounced  the  bosses  and  had 
taken  part  in  reform  movements  against  them  so  long  as 
these  reforms  dealt  only  with  things  that  were  superficial, 
or  with  fundamental  things  that  did  not  affect  themselves 
and  their  associates.  But  the  majority  of  these  men  turned 
to  the  support  of  the  bosses  when  the  great  new  movement 
began  clearly  to  make  itself  evident  as  one  against  privilege 
in  business  no  less  than  against  privilege  in  politics,  as  one 
for  social  and  industrial  no  less  than  for  political  righteous 
ness  and  fair  dealing.  The  big  corporation  lawryer  who  had 
antagonized  the  boss  in  matters  which  he  regarded  as 
purely  political  stood  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  the  boss 
when  the  movement  for  betterment  took  shape  in  direct  at 
tack  on  the  combination  of  business  with  politics  and  with 
the  judiciary  which  has  done  so  much  to  enthrone  privilege 
in  the  economic  world. 

The  reformers  who  denounced  political  corruption  and 
fraud  when  shown  at  the  expense  of  their  own  candidates  by 
machine  ward  heelers  of  a  low  type  hysterically  applauded 
similar  corrupt  trickery  when  practiced  by  these  same 
politicians  against  men  with  whose  political  and  industrial 
programme  the  reformers  were  not  in  sympathy.  I  had 
always  been  instinctively  and  by  nature  a  democrat,  but  if 
I  had  needed  conversion  to  the  democratic  ideal  here  in 
America  the  stimulus  would  have  been  supplied  by  what  I 
saw  of  the  attitude,  not  merely  of  the  bulk  of  the  men  of 
greatest  wealth,  but  of  the  bulk  of  the  men  who  most  prided 
themselves  upon  their  education  and  culture,  w^hen  we  be 
gan  in  good  faith  to  grapple  with  the  wTrong  and  injus 
tice  of  our  social  and  industrial  system,  and  to  hit  at  the 
men  responsible  for  the  wrong,  no  matter  how  high  they 
stood  in  business  or  in  politics,  at  the  bar  or  on  the  bench. 
It  was  while  I  was  Governor,  and  especially  in  connection 
with  the  franchise  tax  legislation,  that  I  first  became  thor 
oughly  aware  of  the  real  causes  of  this  attitude  among  the 
men  of  great  wealth  and  among  the  men  who  took  their 
tone  from  the  men  of  great  wealth. 


284    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Very  soon  after  my  victory  in  the  race  for  Governor  I 
had  one  or  two  experiences  with  Senator  Platt  which  showed 
in  amusing  fashion  how  absolute  the  rule  of  the  boss  was  in 
the  politics  of  that  day.  Senator  Platt,  who  was  always 
most  kind  and  friendly  in  his  personal  relations  with  me, 
asked  me  in  one  day  to  talk  over  what  was  to  be  done  at 
Albany.  He  had  the  two  or  three  nominal  heads  of  the 
organization  with  him.  They  were  his  lieutenants,  who 
counseled  and  influenced  him,  whose  advice  he  often  fol 
lowed,  but  who,  when  he  had  finally  made  up  his  mind, 
merely  registered  and  carried  out  his  decrees.  After  a 
little  conversation  the  Senator  asked  if  I  had  any  member 
of  the  Assembly  whom  I  wished  to  have  put  on  any  com 
mittee,  explaining  that  the  committees  were  being  arranged. 
I  answered  no,  and  expressed  my  surprise  at  what  he  had 
said,  because  I  had  not  understood  the  Speaker  who  ap 
pointed  the  committees  had  himself  been  agreed  upon  by 
the  members-elect.  <kOh!"  responded  the  Senator,  with  a 
tolerant  smile,  "He  has  not  been  chosen  yet,  but  of  course 
whoever  we  choose  as  Speaker  will  agree  beforehand  to 
make  the  appointments  we  wish."  I  made  a  mental  note 
to  the  effect  that  if  they  attempted  the  same  process  with 
the  Governor-elect  they  would  find  themselves  mistaken. 

In  a  few  days  the  opportunity  to  prove  this  arrived. 
Under  the  preceding  Administration  there  had  been  grave 
scandals  about  the  Erie  Canal,  the  trans-State  Canal,  and 
these  scandals  had  been  one  of  the  chief  issues  in  the  cam 
paign  for  the  Governorship.  The  construction  of  this  work 
was  under  the  control  of  the  Superintendent  of  Public 
Works.  In  the  actual  state  of  affairs  his  office  was  by  far 
the  most  important  office  under  me,  and  I  intended  to  ap 
point  to  it  some  man  of  high  character  and  capacity  who 
could  be  trusted  to  do  the  work  not  merely  honestly  and 
efficiently,  but  without  regard  to  politics.  A  week  or  so 
after  the  Speakership  incident  Senator  Platt  asked  me  to 
come  and  see  him  (he  was  an  old  and  physically  feeble  man, 
able  to  move  about  only  with  extreme  difficulty). 

On  arrival  I  found  the  Lieutenant-Governor  elect,  Mr. 


THE    NEW    YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  285 

Woodruff,  who  had  also  been  asked  to  come.  The  Senator 
informed  me  that  he  was  glad  to  say  that  I  would  have  a 
most  admirable  man  as  Superintendent  of  Public  Works, 
as  he  had  just  received  a  telegram  from  a  certain  gentle 
man,  whom  he  named,  saying  that  he  would  accept  the  posi 
tion!  He  handed  me  the  telegram.  The  man  in  question 
was  a  man  I  liked ;  later  I  appointed  him  to  an  important 
office  in  which  he  did  well.  But  he  came  from  a  city  along 
the  line  of  the  canal,  so  that  I  did  not  think  it  best  that  he 
should  be  appointed  anyhow ;  and,  moreover,  what  was  far 
more  important,  it  was  necessary  to  have  it  understood  at 
the  very  outset  that  the  Administration  was  my  Adminis 
tration  and  was  no  one  else 's  but  mine.  So  I  told  the  Sena 
tor  very  politely  that  I  was  sorry,  but  that  I  could  not  ap 
point  his  man.  This  produced  an  explosion,  but  I  declined 
to  lose  my  temper,  merely  repeating  that  I  must  decline  to 
accept  any  man  chosen  for  me,  and  that  I  must  choose  the 
man  myself.  Although  I  was  very  polite,  I  was  also  very 
firm,  and  Mr.  Platt  and  his  friends  finally  abandoned  their 
position. 

I  appointed  an  engineer  from  Brooklyn,  a  veteran  of  the 
Civil  War,  Colonel  Partridge,  who  had  served  in  Mayor 
Low's  administration.  He  was  an  excellent  man  in  every 
way.  He  chose  as  his  assistant,  actively  to  superintend  the 
work,  a  Cornell  graduate  named  Elon  Hooker,  a  man  with 
no  political  backing  at  all,  picked  simply  because  he  was  the 
best  equipped  man  for  the  place.  The  office,  the  most  im 
portant  office  under  me,  was  run  in  admirable  fashion 
throughout  my  Administration;  I  doubt  if  there  ever  was 
an  important  department  of  the  New  York  State  Govern 
ment  run  with  a  higher  standard  of  efficiency  and  integrity. 

But  this  was  not  all  that  had  to  be  done  about  the  canals. 
Evidently  the  whole  policy  hitherto  pursued  had  been  fool 
ish  and  inadequate.  I  appointed  a  first-class  non-partisan 
commission  of  business  men  and  expert  engineers  who  went 
into  the  matter  exhaustively,  and  their  report  served  as  the 
basis  upon  which  our  entire  present  canal  system  is  based. 
There  remained  the  question  of  determining  whether  the 


286    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

canal  officials  who  were  in  office  before  I  became  Governor, 
and  whom  I  had  declined  to  reappoint,  had  been  guilty  of 
any  action  because  of  which  it  would  be  possible  to  proceed 
against  them  criminally  or  otherwise  under  the  law.  Such 
criminal  action  had  been  freely  charged  against  them  during 
the  campaign  by  the  Democratic  (including  the  so-called 
mugwump)  press.  To  determine  this  matter  I  appointed 
two  Democratic  lawyers,  Messrs.  Fox  and  MacFarlane  (the 
latter  Federal  District  Attorney  for  New  York  under  Presi 
dent  Cleveland),  and  put  the  whole  investigation  in  their 
hands.  These  gentlemen  made  an  exhaustive  investigation 
lasting  several  months.  They  reported  that  there  had  been 
grave  delinquency  in  the  prosecution  of  the  work,  delin 
quency  which  justified  public  condemnation  of  those  re 
sponsible  for  it  (who  were  out  of  office),  but  that  there  was 
no  ground  for  criminal  prosecution.  I  laid  their  report  be 
fore  the  Legislature  with  a  message  in  which  I  said :  "  There 
is  probably  no  lawyer  of  high  standing  in  the  State  who, 
after  studying  the  report  of  counsel  in  this  case  and  the 
testimony  taken  by  the  investigating  commission,  would 
disagree  with  them  as  to  the  impracticability  of  a  successful 
prosecution.  Under  such  circumstances  the  one  remedy 
was  a  thorough  change  in  the  methods  and  management. 
This  change  has  been  made." 

When  my  successor  in  the  Governorship  took  office, 
Colonel  Partridge  retired,  and  Elon  Hooker,  finding  that 
he  could  no  longer  act  with  entire  disregard  of  politics  and 
with  an  eye  single  to  the  efficiency  of  the  work,  also  left.  A 
dozen  years  later — having  in  the  meantime  made  a  marked 
success  in  a  business  career — he  became  the  Treasurer  of 
the  National  Progressive  party. 

My  action  in  regard  to  the  canals,  and  the  management 
of  his  office,  the  most  important  office  under  me,  by  Colonel 
Partridge,  established  my  relations  with  Mr.  Platt  from  the 
outset  on  prettynearly  the  right  basis.  But,  besides  various 
small  difficulties,  we  had  one  or  two  serious  bits  of  trouble 
before  my  duties  as  Governor  ceased.  It  must  be  remem 
bered  that  Mr.  Platt  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a  large 


THE   NEW   YORK   GOVERNORSHIP  287 

part  of,  and  sometimes  a  majority  of,  the  Legislature. 
There  were  a  few  entirely  independent  men  such  as  Na 
thaniel  Elsberg,  Eegis  Post,  and  Alford  Cooley,  in  each  of 
the  two  houses;  the  remainder  were  under  the  control  of 
the  Kepublican  and  Democratic  bosses,  but  could  also  be 
more  or  less  influenced  by  an  aroused  public  opinion.  The 
two  machines  were  apt  to  make  common  cause  if  their  vital 
interests  were  touched.  It  was  my  business  to  devise 
methods  by  which  either  the  two  machines  could  be  kept 
apart  or  else  overthrown  if  they  came  together. 

My  desire  was  to  achieve  results,  and  not  merely  to  issue 
manifestoes  of  virtue.  It  is  very  easy  to  be  efficient  if  the 
efficiency  is  based  on  unscrupulousness,  and  it  is  still  easier 
to  be  virtuous  if  one  is  content  with  the  purely  negative 
virtue  which  consists  in  not  doing  anything  wrong,  but  be 
ing  wholly  unable  to  accomplish  anything  positive  for  good. 
My  favorite  quotation  from  Josh  Billings  again  applies :  It 
is  so  much  easier  to  be  a  harmless  dove  than  a  wise  serpent. 
My  duty  was  to  combine  both  idealism  and  efficiency.  At 
that  time  the  public  conscience  was  still  dormant  as  regards 
many  species  of  political  and  business  misconduct,  as  to 
which  during  the  next  decade  it  became  sensitive.  I  had  to 
work  with  the  tools  at  hand  and  to  take  into  account  the 
feeling  of  the  people,  which  I  have  already  described.  My 
aim  was  persistently  to  refuse  to  be  put  in  a  position  where 
what  I  did  would  seem  to  be  a  mere  faction  struggle  against 
Senator  Platt.  My  aim  was  to  make  a  fight  only  when  I 
could  so  manage  it  that  there  could  be  no  question  in  the 
minds  of  honest  men  that  my  prime  purpose  was  not  to 
attack  Mr.  Platt  or  any  one  else  except  as  a  necessary  in 
cident  to  securing  clean  and  efficient  government. 

In  each  case  I  did  my  best  to  persuade  Mr.  Platt  not  to 
oppose  me.  I  endeavored  to  make  it  clear  to  him  that  I  was 
not  trying  to  wrest  the  organization  from  him;  and  I  al 
ways  gave  him  in  detail  the  reasons  why  I  felt  I  had  to  take 
the  position  I  intended  to  adopt.  It  was  only  after  I  had 
exhausted  all  the  resources  of  my  patience  that  I  would 
finally,  if  he  still  proved  obstinate,  tell  him  that  I  intended 


288    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

to  make  the  figlit  anyhow.  As  I  have  said,  the  Senator  was 
an  old  and  feeble  man  in  physique,  and  it  was  possible  for 
him  to  go  about  very  little.  Until  Friday  evening  he  would 
be  kept  at  his  duties  at  Washington,  while  I  was  in  Albany. 
If  I  wished  to  see  him  it  generally  had  to  be  at  his  hotel  in 
New  York  on  Saturday,  and  usually  I  would  go  there  to 
breakfast  with  him.  The  one  thing  I  would  not  permit  was 
anything  in  the  nature  of  a  secret  or  clandestine  meeting. 
I  always  insisted  on  going  openly.  Solemn  reformers  of 
the  torn-fool  variety,  who,  according  to  their  custom,  paid 
attention  to  the  name  and  not  the  thing,  were  much  exer 
cised  over  my  "breakfasting  with  Platt."  Whenever  I 
breakfasted  with  him  they  became  sure  that  the  fact  car 
ried  with  it  some  sinister  significance.  The  worthy  crea 
tures  never  took  the  trouble  to  follow  the  sequence  of  facts 
and  events  for  themselves.  If  they  had  done  so  they  would 
have  seen  that  any  series  of  breakfasts  with  Platt  always 
meant  that  I  was  going  to  do  something  he  did  not  like,  and 
that  I  was  trying,  courteously  and  frankly,  to  reconcile  him 
to  it.  My  object  was  to  make  it  as  easy  as  possible  for  him 
to  come  with  me.  As  long  as  there  was  no  clash  between 
us  there  was  no  object  in  my  seeing  him ;  it  was  only  when 
the  clash  came  or  was  imminent  that  I  had  to  see  him.  A 
series  of  breakfasts  was  always  the  prelude  to  some  active 
warfare.1  In  every  instance  I  substantially  carried  my 
point,  although  in  some  cases  not  in  exactly  the  way  in 
which  I  had  originally  hoped. 

There  were  various  measures  to  which  he  gave  a  grudg 
ing  and  querulous  assent  without  any  break  being  threat 
ened.  I  secured  the  reenactment  of  the  Civil  Service  Law, 
which  under  my  predecessor  had  very  foolishly  been  re 
pealed.  I  secured  a  mass  of  labor  legislation,  including  the 

iTo  illustrate  my  meaning  I  quote  from  a  letter  of  mine  to  Senator  Platt 
of  December  13,  1899.  He  had  been  trying  to  get  me  to  promote  a  certain 
Judge  X  over  the  head  of  another  Judge  Y.  I  wrote:  "There  is  a  strong 
feeling  among  the  judges  and  the  leading  members  of  the  bar  that  Judge  Y 
ought  not  to  have  Judge  X  jumped  over  his  head,  and  I  do  not  see  my  way 
clear  to  doing  it.  I  ani  inclined  to  think  that  the  solution  I  mentioned  to 
you  is  the  solution  I  shall  have  to  adopt.  Remember  the  breakfast  at  Douglas 
Robinson's  at  8:30/* 


THE    NEW    YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  289 

enactment  of  laws  to  increase  the  number  of  factory  in 
spectors,  to  create  a  Tenement  House  Commission  (whose 
findings  resulted  in  further  and  excellent  legislation  to  im 
prove  housing  conditions),  to  regulate  and  improve  sweat 
shop  labor,  to  make  the  eight-hour  and  prevailing  rate  of 
wages  law  effective,  to  secure  the  genuine  enforcement  of 
the  act  relating  to  the  hours  of  railway  workers,  to  compel 
railways  to  equip  freight  trains  with  air-brakes,  to  regu 
late  the  working  hours  of  women  and  protect  both  women 
and  children  from  dangerous  machinery,  to  enforce  good 
scaffolding  provisions  for  workmen  on  buildings,  to  pro 
vide  seats  for  the  use  of  waitresses  in  hotels  and  restau 
rants,  to  reduce  the  hours  of  labor  for  drug-store  clerks,  to 
provide  for  the  registration  of  laborers  for  municipal  em 
ployment.  I  tried  hard  but  failed  to  secure  an  employers ' 
liability  law  and  the  state  control  of  employment  offices. 
There  was  hard  fighting  over  some  of  these  bills,  and,  what 
was  much  more  serious,  there  was  effort  to  get  round  the 
law  by  trickery  and  by  securing  its  inefficient  enforcement. 
I  was  continually  helped  by  men  with  whom  I  had  gotten 
in  touch  while  in  the  Police  Department ;  men  such  as  James 
Bronson  Eeynolds,  through  whom  I  first  became  interested 
in  settlement  work  on  the  East  Side.  Once  or  twice  I  went 
suddenly  down  to  New  York  City  without  warning  any  one 
and  traversed  the  tenement-house  quarters,  visiting  various 
sweat-shops  picked  at  random.  Jake  Eiis  accompanied  me ; 
and  as  a  result  of  our  inspection  we  got  not  only  an  im 
provement  in  the  law  but  a  still  more  marked  improvement 
in  its  administration.  Thanks  chiefly  to  the  activity  and 
good  sense  of  Dr.  John  H.  Pryor,  of  Buffalo,  and  by  the  use 
of  every  pound  of  pressure  which  as  Governor  I  could 
bring  to  bear  in  legitimate  fashion — including  a  special 
emergency  message — we  succeeded  in  getting  through  a  bill 
providing  for  the  first  State  hospital  for  incipient  tubercu 
losis.  We  got  valuable  laws  for  the  farmer ;  laws  prevent 
ing  the  adulteration  of  food  products  (which  laws  were 
equally  valuable  to  the  consumer),  and  laws  helping  the 
dairyman.  In  addition  to  labor  legislation  I  was  able  to 


290    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

do  a  good  deal  for  forest  preservation  and  the  protection 
of  our  wild  life.  All  that  later  I  strove  for  in  the  Nation 
in  connection  with  Conservation  was  foreshadowed  by  what 
I  strove  to  obtain  for  New  York  State  when  I  was  Governor ; 
and  I  was  already  working  in  connection  with  Gifford  Pin- 
chot  and  Newell.  I  secured  better  administration,  and  some 
improvement  in  the  laws  themselves.  The  improvement  in 
administration,  and  in  the  character  of  the  game  and  forest 
wardens,  was  secured  partly  as  the  result  of  a  conference 
in  the  executive  chamber  which  I  held  with  forty  of  the  best 
guides  and  woodsmen  of  the  Adirondacks. 

As  regards  most  legislation,  even  that  affecting  labor  and 
the  forests,  I  got  on  fairly  well  with  the  machine.  But  on 
the  two  issues  in  which  "big  business"  and  the  kind  of 
politics  which  is  allied  to  big  business  were  most  involved  we 
clashed  hard — and  clashing  with  Senator  Platt  meant  clash 
ing  with  the  entire  Eepublican  organization,  and  with  the 
organized  majority  in  each  house  of  the  Legislature.  One 
clash  was  in  connection  with  the  Superintendent  of  Insur 
ance,  a  man  whose  office  made  him  a  factor  of  immense  im 
portance  in  the  big  business  circles  of  New  York.  The  then 
incumbent  of  the  office  was  an  efficient  man,  the  boss  of  an 
up-State  county,  a  veteran  politician  and  one  of  Mr.  Platt 's 
right-hand  men.  Certain  investigations  which  I  made — in 
the  course  of  the  fight — showed  that  this  Superintendent  of 
Insurance  had  been  engaged  in  large  business  operations  in 
New  York  City.  These  operations  had  thrown  him  into  a 
peculiarly  intimate  business  contact  of  one  sort  and  an 
other  with  various  financiers  with  whom  I  did  not  deem 
it  expedient  that  the  Superintendent  of  Insurance,  while 
such,  should  have  any  intimate  and  secret  money-making 
relations.  Moreover,  the  gentleman  in  question  represented 
the  straitest  sect  of  the  old-time  spoils  politicians.  I  there 
fore  determined  not  to  reappoint  him.  Unless  I  could  get 
his  successor  confirmed,  however,  he  would  stay  in  under 
the  law,  and  the  Eepublican  machine,  with  the  assistance  of 
Tammany,  expected  to  control  far  more  than  a  majority  of 
all  the  Senators. 


THE    NEW   YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  291 

Mr.  Platt  issued  an  ultimatim  to  me  that  the  incumbent 
must  be  reappointed  or  else  that  he  would  fight,  and  that 
if  he  chose  to  fight  the  man  would  stay  in  anyhow  because 
I  could  not  oust  him — for  under  the  New  York  Constitution 
the  assent  of  the  Senate  was  necessary  not  only  to  appoint 
a  man  to  office  but  to  remove  him  from  office.  As  always 
with  Mr.  Platt,  I  persistently  refused  to  lose  my  temper,  no 
matter  what  he  said — he  was  much  too  old  and  physically 
feeble  for  there  to  be  any  point  of  honor  in  taking  up  any 
of  his  remarks — and  I  merely  explained  good-humoredly 
that  I  had  made  up  my  mind  and  that  the  gentleman  in  ques 
tion  would  not  be  retained.  As  for  not  being  able  to  get  his 
successor  confirmed,  I  pointed  out  that  as  soon  as  the  Legis 
lature  adjourned  I  could  and  would  appoint  another  man 
temporarily.  Mr.  Platt  then  said  that  the  incumbent  would 
be  put  back  as  soon  as  the  Legislature  reconvened;  I  ad 
mitted  that  this  was  possible,  but  added  cheerfully  that  I 
would  remove  him  again  just  as  soon  as  that  Legislature  ad 
journed,  and  that  even  though  I  had  an  uncomfortable  time 
myself,  I  would  guarantee  to  make  my  opponents  more  un 
comfortable  still.  We  parted  without  any  sign  of  reaching 
an  agreement. 

There  remained  some  weeks  before  final  action  could  be 
taken,  and  the  Senator  was  confident  that  I  would  have  to 
yield.  His  most  efficient  allies  were  the  pretended  re 
formers,  most  of  them  my  open  or  covert  enemies,  who 
loudly  insisted  that  I  must  make  an  open  fight  on  the  Sena 
tor  himself  and  on  the  Republican  organization.  This  was 
what  he  wished,  for  at  that  time  there  was  no  way  of  up 
setting  him  within  the  Eepublican  party;  and,  as  I  have 
said,  if  I  had  permitted  the  contest  to  assume  the  shape  of 
a  mere  faction  fight  between  the  Governor  and  the  United 
States  Senator,  I  would  have  insured  the  victory  of  the 
machine.  So  I  blandly  refused  to  let  the  thing  become  a 
personal  fight,  explaining  again  and  again  that  I  was  per 
fectly  willing  to  appoint  an  organization  man,  and  naming 
two  or  three  whom  I  was  willing  to  appoint,  but  also  ex 
plaining  that  I  would  not  retain  the  incumbent,  and  would 


292    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

not  appoint  any  man  of  his  type.  Meanwhile  pressure  on 
behalf  of  the  said  incumbent  began  to  come  from  the  busi 
ness  men  of  New  York. 

The  Superintendent  of  Insurance  was  not  a  man  whose 
ill  will  the  big  life  insurance  companies  cared  to  incur,  and 
company  after  company  passed  resolutions  asking  me  to 
reappoint  him,  although  in  private  some  of  the  men  who 
signed  these  resolutions  nervously  explained  that  they  did 
not  mean  what  they  had  written,  and  hoped  I  would  remove 
the  man.  A  citizen  prominent  in  reform  circles,  marked  by 
the  Cato-like  austerity  of  his  reform  professions,  had  a  son 
who  was  a  counsel  for  one  of  the  insurance  companies.  The 
father  was  engaged  in  writing  letters  to  the  papers  demand 
ing  in  the  name  of  uncompromising  virtue  that  I  should  not 
only  get  rid  of  the  Superintendent  of  Insurance,  but  in  his 
place  should  appoint  somebody  or  other  personally  offen 
sive  to  Senator  Platt — which  last  proposition,  if  adopted, 
would  have  meant  that  the  Superintendent  of  Insurance 
would  have  stayed  in,  for  the  reasons  I  have  already  given. 
Meanwhile  the  son  came  to  see  me  on  behalf  of  the  insurance 
company  he  represented  and  told  me  that  the  company  was 
anxious  that  there  should  be  a  change  in  the  superintend- 
ency ;  that  if  I  really  meant  to  fight,  they  thought  they  had 
influence  with  four  of  the  State  Senators,  Democrats  and 
Eepublicans,  whom  they  could  get  to  vote  to  confirm  the 
man  I  nominated,  but  that  they  wished  to  be  sure  that  I 
would  not  abandon  the  fight,  because  it  would  be  a  very  bad 
thing  for  them  if  I  started  the  fight  and  then  backed  down. 
I  told  my  visitor  that  he  need  be  under  no  apprehensions, 
that  I  would  certainly  see  the  fight  through.  A  man  wiio 
has  much  to  do  with  that  kind  of  politics  which  concerns 
both  New  York  politicians  and  New  York  business  men  and 
lawyers  is  not  easily  surprised,  and  therefore  I  felt  no 
other  emotion  than  a  rather  sardonic  amusement  when 
thirty-six  hours  later  I  read  in  the  morning  paper  an  open 
letter  from  the  officials  of  the  very  company  who  had  been 
communicating  with  me  in  which  they  enthusiastically  ad 
vocated  the  renomination  of  the  Superintendent.  Shortly 


THE   NEW   YORK   GOVERNORSHIP  293 

afterwards  my  visitor,  the  young  lawyer,  called  me  up  on 
the  telephone  and  explained  that  the  officials  did  not  mean 
what  they  had  said  in  this  letter,  that  they  had  been  obliged 
to  write  it  for  fear  of  the  Superintendent,  but  that  if  they 
got  the  chance  they  intended  to  help  me  get  rid  of  him.  I 
thanked  him  and  said  I  thought  I  could  manage  the  fight  by 
myself.  I  did  not  hear  from  him  again,  though  his  father 
continued  to  write  public  demands  that  I  should  practice 
pure  virtue,  undefiled  and  offensive. 

Meanwhile  Senator  Platt  declined  to  yield.  I  had  picked 
out  a  man,  a  friend  of  his,  who  I  believed  would  make  an 
honest  and  competent  official,  and  whose  position  in  the 
organization  was  such  that  I  did  not  believe  the  Senate 
would  venture  to  reject  him.  However,  up  to  the  day  before 
the  appointment  was  to  go  to  the  Senate,  Mr.  Platt  re 
mained  unyielding.  I  saw  him  that  afternoon  and  tried  to 
get  him  to  yield,  but  he  said  No,  that  if  I  insisted,  it  would 
be  war  to  the  knife,  and  my  destruction,  and  perhaps  the 
destruction  of  the  party.  I  said  I  was  very  sorry,  that  I 
could  not  yield,  and  if  the  war  came  it  would  have  to  come, 
and  that  next  morning  I  should  send  in  the  name  of  the  Su 
perintendent's  successor.  We  parted,  and  soon  afterwards 
I  received  from  the  man  who  was  at  the  moment  Mr.  Platt 's 
right-hand  lieutenant  a  request  to  know  where  he  could  see 
me  that  evening.  I  appointed  the  Union  League  Club.  My 
visitor  went  over  the  old  ground,  explained  that  the  Senator 
would  under  no  circumstances  yield,  that  he  was  certain  to 
win  in  the  fight,  that  my  reputation  would  be  destroyed,  and 
that  he  wished  to  save  me  from  such  a  lamentable  smash-up 
as  an  ending  to  my  career.  I  could  only  repeat  what  I  had 
already  said,  and  after  half  an  hour  of  futile  argument  I 
rose  and  said  that  nothing  was  to  be  gained  by  further  talk 
and  that  I  might  as  well  go.  My  visitor  repeated  that  I  had 
this  last  chance,  and  that  ruin  was  ahead  of  me  if  I  refused 
it ;  whereas,  if  I  accepted  it,  everything  would  be  made  easy. 
I  shook  my  head  and  answered,  "There  is  nothing  to  add 
f-o  what  I  have  already  said."  He  responded,  "You  have 
made  up  your  mind?"  and  I  said,  "I  have."  He  then  said. 


294    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

"You  know  it  means  your  ruin?"  and  I  answered,  "Well, 
we  will  see  about  that,"  and  walked  toward  the  door.  He 
said,  "You  understand,  the  fight  will  begin  to-morrow  and 
will  be  carried  on  to  the  bitter  end."  I  said,  "Yes,"  and 
added,  as  I  reached  the  door,  "Good  night."  Then,  as  the 
door  opened,  my  opponent,  or  visitor,  whichever  one  chooses 
to  call  him,  whose  face  was  as  impassive  and  as  inscrutable 
as  that  of  Mr.  John  Hamlin  in  a  poker  game,  said:  "Hold 
on!  We  accept.  Send  in  So-and-so  [the  man  I  had  named]. 
The  Senator  is  very  sorry,  but  he  will  make  no  further  op 
position!"  I  never  saw  a  bluff  carried  more  resolutely 
through  to  the  final  limit.  My  success  in  the  affair,  coupled 
with  the  appointment  of  Messrs.  Partridge  and  Hooker, 
secured  me  against  further  effort  to  interfere  with  my 
handling  of  the  executive  departments. 

It  was  in  connection  with  the  insurance  business  that  I 
first  met  Mr.  George  W.  Perkins.  He  came  to  me  with  a 
letter  of  introduction  from  the  then  Speaker  of  the  National 
House  of  Kepresentatives,  Tom  Eeed,  which  ran:  "Mr. 
Perkins  is  a  personal  friend  of  mine,  whose  straightfor 
wardness  and  intelligence  will  commend  to  you  whatever 
he  has  to  say.  If  you  will  give  him  proper  opportunity  to 
explain  his  business,  I  have  no  doubt  that  what  he  will  say 
will  be  worthy  of  your  attention."  Mr.  Perkins  wished 
to  see  me  with  reference  to  a  bill  that  had  just  been  in 
troduced  in  the  Legislature,  which  aimed  to  limit  the  aggre 
gate  volume  of  insurance  that  any  New  York  State  company 
could  assume.  There  were  then  three  big  insurance  com 
panies  in  New  York — the  Mutual  Life,  Equitable,  and  New 
York  Life.  Mr.  Perkins  was  a  Vice-President  of  the  New 
York  Life  Insurance  Company  and  Mr.  John  A.  McCall  was 
its  President.  I  had  just  finished  my  fight  against  the  Su 
perintendent  of  Insurance,  whom  I  refused  to  continue  in 
office.  Mr.  McCall  had  written  me  a  very  strong  letter  urg 
ing  that  he  be  retained,  and  had  done  everything  be  could 
to  aid  Senator  Platt  in  securing  his  retention.  The  Mutual 
Life  and  Equitable  people  had  openly  followed  the  same 
course,  but  in  private  had  hedged.  They  were  both  backing 


THE   NEW   YORK   GOVERNORSHIP  295 

the  proposed  bill.  Mr.  McCall  was  opposed  to  it ;  he  was  in 
California,  and  just  before  starting  thither  he  had  been  told 
by  the  Mutual  Life  and  Equitable  that  the  Limitation  Bill 
was  favored  by  me  and  would  be  put  through  if  such  a  thing 
were  possible.  Mr.  McCall  did  not  know  me,  and  on  leaving 
for  California  told  Mr.  Perkins  that  from  all  he  could  learn 
he  was  sure  I  was  bent  on  putting  this  bill  through,  and  that 
nothing  he  could  say  to  me  would  change  my  view ;  in  fact, 
because  he  had  fought  so  hard  to  retain  the  old  Insurance 
Superintendent,  he  felt  that  I  would  be  particularly  opposed 
to  anything  he  might  wish  done. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  had  no  such  feeling.  I  had  been 
carefully  studying  the  question.  I  had  talked  with  the 
Mutual  Life  and  Equitable  people  about  it,  but  was  not 
committed  to  any  particular  course,  and  had  grave  doubts 
as  to  whether  it  was  well  to  draw  the  line  on  size  instead  of 
on  conduct.  I  was  therefore  very  glad  to  see  Perkins  and 
get  a  new  point  of  view.  I  went  over  the  matter  with  a 
great  deal  of  care  and  at  considerable  length,  and  after  we 
had  thrashed  the  matter  out  pretty  fully  and  Perkins  had 
laid  before  me  in  detail  the  methods  employed  by  Austria, 
Germany,  Switzerland,  and  other  European  countries  to 
handle  their  large  insurance  companies,  I  took  the  position 
that  there  undoubtedly  were  evils  in  the  insurance  business, 
but  that  they  did  not  consist  in  insuring  people's  lives,  for 
that  certainly  was  not  an  evil ;  and  I  did  not  see  how  the  real 
evils  could  be  eradicated  by  limiting  or  suppressing  a  com 
pany's  ability  to  protect  an  additional  number  of  lives  with 
insurance.  I  therefore  announced  that  I  would  not  favor 
a  bill  that  limited  volume  of  business,  and  would  not  sign 
it  if  it  were  passed;  but  that  I  favored  legislation  that 
would  make  it  impossible  to  place,  through  agents,  policies 
that  were  ambiguous  and  misleading,  or  to  pay  exorbitant 
prices  to  agents  for  business,  or  to  invest  policy-holders' 
money  in  improper  securities,  or  to  give  power  to  officers  to 
use  the  company's  funds  for  their  own  personal  profit.  In 
reaching  this  determination  I  was  helped  by  Mr.  Loeb,  then 
merely  a  stenographer  in  my  office,  but  who  had  already 


1>9G    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

attracted  my  attention  both  by  his  efficiency  and  by  his 
loyalty  to  his  former  employers,  who  were  for  the  most 
part  my  political  opponents.  Mr.  Loeb  gave  me  much  in 
formation  about  various  improper  practices  in  the  insur 
ance  business.  I  began  to  gather  data  on  the  subject,  with 
the  intention  of  bringing  about  corrective  legislation,  for 
at  that  time  I  expected  to  continue  in  office  as  Governor. 
But  in  a  few  weeks  I  was  nominated  as  Vice-President,  and 
my  successor  did  nothing  about  the  matter. 

So  far  as  I  remember,  this  was  the  first  time  the  question 
of  correcting  evils  in  a  business  by  limiting  the  volume  of 
business  to  be  done  was  ever  presented  to  me,  and  my  de 
cision  in  the  matter  was  on  all  fours  with  the  position  I 
have  always  since  taken  when  any  similar  principle  was 
involved.  At  the  time  when  I  made  my  decision  about  the 
Limitation  Bill,  I  was  on  friendly  terms  with  the  Mutual 
and  Equitable  people  who  were  back  of  it,  whereas  I  did 
not  know  Mr.  McCall  at  all,  and  Mr.  Perkins  only  from  hear 
ing  him  discuss  the  bill. 

An  interesting  feature  of  the  matter  developed  subse 
quently.  Five  years  later,  after  the  insurance  investiga 
tions  took  place,  the  Mutual  Life  strongly  urged  the  pas 
sage  of  a  Limitation  Bill,  and,  because  of  the  popular  feel 
ing  developed  by  the  exposure  of  the  improper  practices  of 
the  companies,  this  bill  was  generally  approved.  Governor 
Hughes  adopted  the  suggestion,  such  a  bill  was  passed  by 
the  Legislature,  and  Governor  Hughes  signed  it.  This  bill 
caused  the  three  great  New  York  companies  to  reduce 
markedly  the  volume  of  business  they  were  doing ;  it  threw 
a  great  many  agents  out  of  employment,  and  materially  cur 
tailed  the  foreign  business  of  the  companies — which  busi 
ness  wras  bringing  annually  a  considerable  sum  of  money 
to  this  country  for  investment.  In  short,  the  experiment 
worked  so  badly  that  before  Governor  Hughes  went  out  of 
office  one  of  the  very  last  bills  he  signed  was  one  that  per 
mitted  the  life  insurance  companies  to  increase  their  busi 
ness  each  year  by  an  amount  representing  a  certain  per 
centage  of  the  business  they  had  previously  done.  This 


THE    NEW   YOKK    GOVERNORSHIP  297 

in  practice,  within  a  few  years,  practically  annulled  the 
Limitation  Bill  that  had  been  previously  passed.  The  ex 
periment  of  limiting  the  size  of  business,  of  legislating 
against  it  merely  because  it  was  big,  had  been  tried,  and 
had  failed  so  completely  that  the  authors  of  the  bill  had 
themselves  in  effect  repealed  it.  My  action  in  refusing  to 
try  the  experiment  had  been  completely  justified. 

As  a  sequel  to  this  incident  I  got  Mr.  Perkins  to  serve 
on  the  Palisade  Park  Commission.  At  the  time  I  was  taking 
active  part  in  the  effort  to  save  the  Palisades  from  vandal 
ism  and  destruction  by  getting  the  States  of  New  York  and 
New  Jersey  jointly  to  include  them  in  a  public  park.  It  is 
not  easy  to  get  a  responsible  and  capable  man  of  business  to 
undertake  such  a  task,  which  is  unpaid,  wilich  calls  on  his 
part  for  an  immense  expenditure  of  time,  money,  and  en 
ergy,  which  offers  no  reward  of  any  kind,  and  which  entails 
the  certainty  of  abuse  and  misrepresentation.  Mr.  Perkins 
accepted  the  position,  and  has  filled  it  for  the  last  thirteen 
years,  doing  as  disinterested,  efficient,  and  useful  a  bit  of 
public  service  as  any  man  in  the  State  has  done  throughout 
these  thirteen  years. 

The  case  of  most  importance  in  which  I  clashed  with 
Senator  Platt  related  to  a  matter  of  fundamental  govern 
mental  policy,  and  was  the  first  step  I  ever  took  toward 
bringing  big  corporations  under  effective  governmental 
control.  In  this  case  I  had  to  fight  the  Democratic  machine 
as  well  as  the  Eepublican  machine,  for  Senator  Hill  and 
Senator  Platt  were  equally  opposed  to  my  action,  and  the 
big  corporation  men,  the  big  business  men  back  of  both  of 
them,  took  precisely  the  same  view  of  these  matters  without 
regard  to  their  party  feelings  on  other  points.  What  I  did 
convulsed  people  at  that  time,  and  marked  the  beginning 
of  the  effort,  at  least  in  the  Eastern  states,  to  make  the 
great  corporations  really  responsible  to  popular  wish  and 
governmental  command.  But  we  have  gone  so  far  past  the 
stage  in  which  we  then  were  that  now  it  seems  well-nigh 
incredible  that  there  should  have  been  any  opposition  at  all 
to  what  I  at  that  time  proposed. 


298    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

The  substitution  of  electric  power  for  horse  power  in  the 
street  car  lines  of  New  York  offered  a  fruitful  chance  for 
the  most  noxious  type  of  dealing  between  business  men  and 
politicians.  The  franchises  granted  by  New  York  were 
granted  without  any  attempt  to  secure  from  the  grantees 
returns,  in  the  way  of  taxation  or  otherwise,  for  the  value 
received.  The  fact  that  they  were  thus  granted  by  improper 
favoritism,  a  favoritism  which  in  many  cases  was  unques 
tionably  secured  by  downright  bribery,  led  to  all  kinds  of 
trouble.  In  return  for  the  continuance  of  these  improper 
favors  to  the  corporations  the  politicians  expected  improper 
favors  in  the  way  of  excessive  campaign  contributions, 
often  contributed  by  the  same  corporation  at  the  same  time 
to  two  opposing  parties.  Before  I  became  Governor  a  bill 
had  been  introduced  into  the  New  York  Legislature  to  tax 
the  franchises  of  these  street  railways.  It  affected  a  large 
number  of  corporations,  but  particularly  those  in  New  York 
and  Buffalo.  It  had  been  suffered  to  slumber  undisturbed, 
as  none  of  the  people  in  power  dreamed  of  taking  it  se 
riously,  and  both  the  Republican  and  Democratic  machines 
were  hostile  to  it.  Under  the  rules  of  the  New  York  Legis 
lature  a  bill  could  always  be  taken  up  out  of  its  turn  and 
passed  if  the  Governor  sent  in  a  special  emergency  mes 
sage  on  its  behalf. 

After  I  was  elected  Governor  I  had  my  attention  directed 
to  the  franchise  tax  matter,  looked  into  the  subject,  and 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  a  matter  of  plain  decency 
and  honesty  that  these  companies  should  pay  a  tax  on  their 
franchises,  inasmuch  as  they  did  nothing  that  could  be  con 
sidered  as  service  rendered  the  public  in  lieu  of  a  tax.  This 
seemed  to  me  so  evidently  the  common-sense  and  decent 
thing  to  do  that  I  was  hardly  prepared  for  the  storm  of 
protest  and  anger  which  my  proposal  aroused.  Senator 
Platt  and  the  other  machine  leaders  did  everything  to  get 
me  to  abandon  my  intention.  As  usual,  I  saw  them,  talked 
the  matter  all  over  with  them,  and  did  my  best  to  convert 
them  to  my  way  of  thinking.  Senator  Platt,  I  believe,  was 
quite  sincere  in  his  opposition.  He  did  not  believe  in  popu- 


THE    NEW   YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  299 

lar  rule,  and  he  did  believe  that  the  big  business  men  were 
entitled  to  have  things  their  way.  He  profoundly  distrusted 
the  people — naturally  enough,  for  the  kind  of  human  na 
ture  with  which  a  boss  comes  in  contact  is  not  of  an  exalted 
type.  He  felt  that  anarchy  would  come  if  there  was  any 
interference  with  a  system  by  which  the  people  in  mass 
were,  under  various  necessary  cloaks,  controlled  by  the 
leaders  in  the  political  and  business  worlds.  He  wrote  me 
a  very  strong  letter  of  protest  against  my  attitude,  ex 
pressed  in  dignified,  friendly,  and  temperate  language,  but 
using  one  word  in  a  curious  way.  This  was  the  word  "  al 
truistic."  He  stated  in  his  letter  that  he  had  not  objected 
to  my  being  independent  in  politics,  because  he  had  been 
sure  that  I  had  the  good  of  the  party  at  heart,  and  meant  to 
act  fairly  and  honorably ;  but  that  he  had  been  warned,  be 
fore  I  became  a  candidate,  by  a  number  of  his  business 
friends  that  I  was  a  dangerous  man  because  I  was  "altru 
istic,"  and  that  he  now  feared  that  my  conduct  would  jus 
tify  the  alarm  thus  expressed.  I  was  interested  in  this,  not 
only  because  Senator  Platt  was  obviously  sincere,  but  be 
cause  of  the  way  in  which  he  used  "altruistic"  as  a  term  of 
reproach,  as  if  it  was  Communistic  or  Socialistic — the  last 
being  a  word  he  did  use  to  me  when,  as  now  and  then  hap 
pened,  he  thought  that  my  proposals  warranted  fairly  reck 
less  vituperation. 

Senator  Platt 's  letter  ran  in  part  as  follows : 

"When  the  subject  of  your  nomination  was  under  con 
sideration,  there  was  one  matter  that  gave  me  real  anxiety. 
I  think  you  will  have  no  trouble  in  appreciating  the  fact 
that  it  was  not  the  matter  of  your  independence.  I  think 
we  have  got  far  enough  along  in  our  political  acquaintance 
for  you  to  see  that  my  support  in  a  convention  does  not 
imply  subsequent  'demands,'  nor  any  other  relation  that 
may  not  reasonably  exist  for  the  welfare  of  the  party.  .  .  . 
The  thing  that  did  bother  me  was  this :  I  had  heard  from  a 
good  many  sources  that  you  were  a  little  loose  on  the  rela 
tions  of  capital  and  labor,  on  trusts  and  combinations,  and, 


300    '1THS>DORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

indeed,  on  those  numerous  questions  which  have  recently 
arisen  in  politics  affecting  the  security  of  earnings  and  the 
right  of  a  man  to  run  his  own  business  in  his  own  way,  with 
due  respect  of  course  to  the  Ten  Commandments  and  the 
Penal  Code.  Or,  to  get  at  it  even  more  clearly,  I  under 
stood  from  a  number  of  business  men,  and  among  them 
many  of  your  own  personal  friends,  that  you  entertained 
various  altruistic  ideas,  all  very  well  in  their  way,  but  which 
before  they  could  safely  be  put  into  law  needed  very  pro 
found  consideration.  .  .  .  You  have  just  adjourned  a  Legis 
lature  which  created  a  good  opinion  throughout  the  State. 
I  congratulate  you  heartily  upon  this  fact  because  I  sin 
cerely  believe,  as  everybody  else  does,  that  this  good  im 
pression  exists  very  largely  as  a  result  of  your  personal  in 
fluence  in  the  Legislative  chambers.  But  at  the  last  moment, 
and  to  my  very  great  surprise,  you  did  a  thing  which  has 
caused  the  business  community  of  New  York  to  wonder  how 
far  the  notions  of  Populism,  as  laid  down  in  Kansas  and  Ne 
braska,  have  taken  hold  upon  the  Eepublican  party  of  the 
State  of  New  York." 

In  my  answer  I  pointed  out  to  the  Senator  that  I  had  as 
Governor  unhesitatingly  acted,  at  Buffalo  and  elsewhere, 
to  put  down  mobs,  without  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  pro 
fessed  leaders  of  labor  furiously  denounced  me  for  so  do 
ing  ;  but  that  I  could  no  more  tolerate  wrong  committed  in 
the  name  of  property  than  wrong  committed  against  prop 
erty.  My  letter  ran  in  part  as  follows :  ' 'I  knew  that  you 
had  just  the  feelings  that  you  describe ;  that  is,  apart  from 
my  'impulsiveness,'  you  felt  that  there  was  a  justifiable  anx 
iety  among  men  of  means,  and  especially  men  representing 
large  corporate  interests,  lest  I  might  feel  too  strongly  on 
what  you  term  the  'altruistic'  side  in  matters  of  labor  and 
capital  and  as  regards  the  relations  of  the  State  to  great 
corporations.  ...  I  know  that  when  parties  divide  on  such 
issues  [as  Bryanism]  the  tendency  is  to  force  everybody 
into  one  of  two  camps,  and  to  throw  out  entirely  men  like 
myself,  who  are  as  strongly  opposed  to  Populism  in  every 


THE    NEW    YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  301 

stage  as  the  greatest  representative  of  corporate  wealth, 
but  who  also  feel  strongly  that  many  of  these  representa 
tives  of  enormous  corporate  wealth  have  themselves  been 
responsible  for  a  portion  of  the  conditions  against  which 
Bryanism  is  in  ignorant  revolt.  I  do  not  believe  that  it  is 
wise  or  safe  for  us  as  a  party  to  take  refuge  in  mere  nega 
tion  and  to  say  that  there  are  no  evils  to  be  corrected.  It 
seems  to  me  that  our  attitude  should  be  one  of  correcting 
the  evils  and  thereby  showing  that,  whereas  the  Populists, 
Socialists,  and  others  really  do  not  correct  the  evils  at  all, 
or  else  only  do  so  at  the  expense  of  producing  others  in  ag 
gravated  form ;  on  the  contrary  wre  Republicans  hold  the  just 
balance  and  set  ourselves  as  resolutely  against  improper 
corporate  influence  on  the  one  hand  as  against  demagogy 
and  mob  rule  on  the  other.  I  understand  perfectly  that  such 
an  attitude  of  moderation  is  apt  to  be  misunderstood  when 
passions  are  greatly  excited  and  wrhen  victory  is  apt  to  rest 
with  the  extremists  on  one  side  or  the  other ;  yet  I  think  it  is 
in  the  long  run  the  only  wise  attitude.  ...  I  appreciate 
absolutely  [wiiat  Mr.  Platt  had  said]  that  any  applause  I 
get  will  be  too  evanescent  for  a  moment's  consideration.  I 
appreciate  absolutely  that  the  people  who  now  loudly  ap 
prove  of  my  action  in  the  franchise  tax  bill  will  forget  all 
about  it  in  a  fortnight,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  very 
powerful  interests  adversely  affected  will  always  remember 
it.  ...  [The  leaders]  urged  upon  me  that  I  personally 
could  not  afford  to  take  this  action,  for  under  no  circum 
stances  could  I  ever  again  be  nominated  for  any  public 
office,  as  no  corporation  would  subscribe  to  a  campaign  fund 
if  I  was  on  the  ticket,  and  that  they  would  subscribe  most 
heavily  to  beat  me;  and  when  I  asked  if  this  were  true  of 
Republican  corporations,  the  cynical  answer  was  made  that 
the  corporations  that  subscribed  most  heavily  to  the  cam 
paign  funds  subscribed  impartially  to  both  party  organi 
zations.  Under  all  these  circumstances,  it  seemed  to  me 
there  was  no  alternative  but  to  do  what  I  could  to  secure 
the  passage  of  the  bill." 

These  two  letters,  written  in  the  spring  of  1899,  express 


302    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

clearly  the  views  of  the  two  elements  of  the  Eepublican 
party,  whose  hostility  gradually  grew  until  it  culminated, 
thirteen  years  later.  In  1912  the  political  and  financial 
forces  of  which  Mr.  Platt  had  once  been  the  spokesman, 
usurped  the  control  of  the  party  machinery  and  drove  out 
of  the  party  the  men  wrho  were  loyally  endeavoring  to  apply 
the  principles  of  the  founders  of  the  party  to  the  needs  and 
issues  of  their  own  day. 

I  had  made  up  my  mind  that  if  I  could  get  a  show  in  the 
Legislature  the  bill  would  pass,  because  the  people  had  be 
come  interested  and  the  representatives  would  scarcely  dare 
to  vote  the  wrong  way.  Accordingly,  on  April  27,  1899,  I 
sent  a  special  message  to  the  Assembly,  certifying  that  the 
emergency  demanded  the  immediate  passage  of  the  bill. 
The  machine  leaders  were  bitterly  angry,  and  the  Speaker 
actually  tore  up  the  message  without  reading  it  to  the 
Assembly.  That  night  they  were  busy  trying  to  arrange 
some  device  for  the  defeat  of  the  bill — which  was  not  diffi 
cult,  as  the  session  was  about  to  close.  At  seven  the  next 
morning  I  was  informed  of  what  had  occurred.  At  eight  I 
was  in  the  Capitol  at  the  Executive  chamber,  and  sent  in 
another  special  message,  which  opened  as  follows:  "I  learn 
that  the  emergency  message  which  I  sent  last  evening  to 
the  Assembly  on  behalf  of  the  Franchise  Tax  Bill  has  not 
been  read.  I  therefore  send  hereby  another  message  on  the 
subject.  I  need  not  impress  upon  the  Assembly  the  need  of 
passing  this  bill  at  once."  I  sent  this  message  to  the  As 
sembly,  by  my  secretary,  "William  J.  Youngs,  afterwards 
United  States  District  Attorney  of  Kings,  with  an  intima 
tion  that  if  this  were  not  promptly  read  I  should  come  up 
in  person  and  read  it.  Then,  as  so  often  happens,  the  oppo 
sition  collapsed  and  the  bill  went  through  both  houses  with 
a  rush.  I  had  in  the  House  stanch  friends,  such  as  Eegis 
Post  and  Alf  ord  Cooley,  men  of  character  and  courage,  who 
would  have  fought  to  a  finish  had  the  need  arisen. 

My  troubles  were  not  at  an  end,  however.  The  bill  put 
the  taxation  in  the  hands  of  the  local  county  boards,  and  as 
the  railways  sometimes  passed  through  several  different 


THE    NEW    YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  303 

counties,  this  was  inadvisable.  It  was  the  end  of  the  ses 
sion,  and  the  Legislature  adjourned.  The  corporations  af 
fected,  through  various  counsel,  and  the  different  party 
leaders  of  both  organizations,  urged  me  not  to  sign  the  bill, 
laying  especial  stress  on  this  feature,  and  asking  that  I 
wait  until  the  following  year,  when  a  good  measure  could 
be  put  through  with  this  obnoxious  feature  struck  out.  I 
had  thirty  days  under  the  law  in  which  to  sign  the  bill.  If 
I  did  not  sign  it  by  the  end  of  that  time  it  would  not  become 
a  law.  I  answered  my  political  and  corporation  friends  by 
telling  them  that  I  agreed  with  them  that  this  feature  was 
wrong,  but  that  I  would  rather  have  the  bill  with  this  fea 
ture  than  not  have  it  all  all ;  and  that  I  was  not  willing  to 
trust  to  what  might  be  done  a  year  later.  Therefore,  I  ex 
plained,  I  would  reconvene  the  Legislature  in  special  ses 
sion,  and  if  the  legislators  chose  to  amend  the  bill  by  plac 
ing  the  power  of  taxation  in  the  State  instead  of  in  the 
county  or  municipality,  I  would  be  glad;  but  that  if  they 
failed  to  amend  it,  or  amended  it  improperly,  I  would  sign 
the  original  bill  and  let  it  become  law  as  it  was. 

When  the  representatives  of  Mr.  Platt  and  of  the  corpo 
rations  affected  found  they  could  do  no  better,  they  as 
sented  to  this  proposition.  Efforts  were  tentatively  made 
to  outwit  me,  by  inserting  amendments  that  would  nullify 
the  effect  of  the  law,  or  by  withdrawing  the  law  when  the 
Legislature  convened;  which  would  at  once  have  deprived 
me  of  the  whip  hand.  On  May  12  I  wrote  Senator  Platt, 
outlining  the  amendments  I  desired,  and  said:  "Of  course 
it  must  be  understood  that  I  will  sign  the  present  bill  if  the 
proposed  bill  containing  the  changes  outlined  above  fails  to 
pass. "  On  May  18  I  notified  the  Senate  leader,  John  Raines, 
by  telegram:  "Legislature  has  no  power  to  withdraw  the 
Ford  bill.  If  attempt  is  made  to  do  so,  I  will  sign  the  bill 
at  once.  One  the  same  day,  by  telegram,  I  wired  Mr.  Odell 
concerning  the  bill  the  leaders  were  preparing:  "Some 
provisions  of  bill  very  objectionable.  I  am  at  work  on  bill 
to  show  you  to-morrow.  The  bill  must  not  contain  greater 
changes  than  those  outlined  in  my  message/'  My  wishes 


304    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

were  heeded,  and  when  I  had  reconvened  the  Legislature 
it  amended  the  bill  as  I  outlined  in  my  message ;  and  in  its 
amended  form  the  bill  became  law. 

There  promptly  followed  something  which  afforded  an 
index  of  the  good  faith  of  the  corporations  that  had  been 
protesting  to  me.  As  soon  as  the  change  for  which  they 
had  begged  was  inserted  in  the  law,  and  the  law  was  signed, 
they  turned  round  and  refused  to  pay  the  taxes ;  and  in  the 
lawsuit  that  followed,  they  claimed  that  the  law  was  uncon 
stitutional,  because  it  contained  the  very  clause  which  they 
had  so  clamorously  demanded.  Senator  David  B.  Hill  had 
appeared  before  me  on  behalf  of  the  corporations  to  argue 
for  the  change ;  and  he  then  appeared  before  the  courts  to 
make  the  argument  on  the  other  side.  The  suit  was  carried 
through  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  which 
declared  the  law  constitutional  during  the  time  that  I  was 
President. 

One  of  the  painful  duties  of  the  chief  executive  in  States 
like  New  York,  as  well  as  in  the  Nation,  is  the  refusing  of 
pardons.  Yet  I  can  imagine  nothing  more  necessary  from 
the  standpoint  of  good  citizenship  than  the  ability  to  steel 
one's  heart  in  this  matter  of  granting  pardons.  The  pres 
sure  is  always  greatest  in  two  classes  of  cases:  first,  that 
where  capital  punishment  is  inflicted;  second,  that  where 
the  man  is  prominent  socially  and  in  the  business  world, 
and  where  in  consequence  his  crime  is  apt  to  have  been  one 
concerned  in  some  way  with  finance. 

As  regards  capital  cases,  the  trouble  is  that  emotional 
men  and  women  always  see  only  the  individual  whose  fate 
is  up  at  the  moment,  and  neither  his  victim  nor  the  many 
millions  of  unknown  individuals  who  would  in  the  long  run 
be  harmed  by  what  they  ask.  Moreover,  almost  any  crimi 
nal,  however  brutal,  has  usually  some  person,  often  a  person 
whom  he  has  greatly  wronged,  who  will  plead  for  him.  If 
the  mother  is  alive  she  will  always  come,  and  she  cannot 
help  feeling  that  the  case  in  which  she  is  so  concerned  is 
peculiar,  that  in  this  case  a  pardon  should  be  granted.  It 
was  really  heartrending  to  have  to  see  the  kinsfolk  and 


THE    NEW   YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  305 

friends  of  murderers  who  were  condemned  to  death,  and 
among  the  very  rare  occasions  when  anything  governmental 
or  official  caused  me  to  lose  sleep  were  the  times  when  I  had 
to  listen  to  some  poor  mother  making  a  plea  for  a  criminal 
so  wicked,  so  utterly  brutal  and  depraved,  that  it  would 
have  been  a  crime  on  my  part  to  remit  his  punishment. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  were  certain  crimes  where  re 
quests  for  leniency  merely  made  me  angry.  Such  crimes 
were,  for  instance,  rape,  or  the  circulation  of  indecent  litera 
ture,  or  anything  connected  with  what  would  now  be  called 
the  " white  slave"  traffic,  or  wife  murder,  or  gross  cruelty 
to  women  and  children,  or  seduction  and  abandonment,  or 
the  action  of  some  man  in  getting  a  girl  whom  he  had  se 
duced  to  commit  abortion.  I  am  speaking  in  each  instance 
of  cases  that  actually  came  before  me,  either  while  I  was 
Governor  or  while  I  was  President.  In  an  astonishing 
number  of  these  cases  men  of  high  standing  signed  peti 
tions  or  wrote  letters  asking  me  to  show  leniency  to  the 
criminal.  In  two  or  three  of  the  cases — one  where  some 
young  roughs  had  committed  rape  on  a  helpless  immigrant 
girl,  and  another  in  which  a  physician  of  wealth  and  high 
standing  had  seduced  a  girl  and  then  induced  her  to  com 
mit  abortion — I  rather  lost  my  temper,  and  wrote  to  the  in 
dividuals  who  had  asked  for  the  pardon,  saying  that  I  ex 
tremely  regretted  that  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  increase 
the  sentence.  I  then  let  the  facts  be  made  public,  for 
I  thought  that  my  petitioners  deserved  public  censure. 
Whether  they  received  this  public  censure  or  not  I  did  not 
know,  but  that  my  action  made  them  very  angry  I  do 
know,  and  their  anger  gave  me  real  satisfaction.  The  list 
of  these  petitioners  was  a  fairly  long  one,  and  included  two 
United  States  Senators,  a  Governor  of  a  State,  two  judges, 
an  editor,  and  some  eminent  lawyers  and  business  men. 

In  the  class  of  cases  where  the  offense  was  one  involving 
the  misuse  of  large  sums  of  money  the  reason  for  the  pres 
sure  was  different.  Cases  of  this  kind  more  frequently 
came  before  me  when  I  was  President,  but  they  also  came 
before  me  when  I  was  Governor,  chiefly  in  the  cases  of 


306    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY      < 

county  treasurers  who  had  embezzled  funds.  A  big  bank 
president,  a  railway  magnate,  an  official  connected  with 
some  big  corporation,  or  a  Government  official  in  a  respon 
sible  fiduciary  position,  necessarily  belongs  among  the  men 
who  have  succeeded  in  life.  This  means  that  his  family  are 
living  in  comfort,  and  perhaps  luxury  and  refinement,  and 
that  his  sons  and  daughters  have  been  well  educated.  In 
such  a  case  the  misdeed  of  the  father  comes  as  a  crushing 
disaster  to  the  wife  and  children,  and  the  people  of  the  com 
munity,  however  bitter  originally  against  the  man,  grow  to 
feel  the  most  intense  sympathy  for  the  bowed-down  women 
and  children  who  suffer  for  the  man's  fault.  It  is  a  dread 
ful  thing  in  life  that  so  much  of  atonement  for  wrong-doing 
is  vicarious.  If  it  were  possible  in  such  a  case  to  think 
only  of  the  banker's  or  county  treasurer's  wife  and  children, 
any  man  would  pardon  the  offender  at  once.  Unfortunately, 
it  is  not  right  to  think  only  of  the  women  and  children.  The 

,  very  fact  that  in  cases  of  this  class  there  is  certain  to  be 
pressure  from  high  sources,  pressure  sometimes  by  men 
who  have  been  beneficially,  even  though  remotely,  inter 
ested  in  the  man's  criminality,  no  less  than  pressure  because 

1  of  honesty  sympathy  with  the  wife  and  children,  makes  it 
necessary  that  the  good  public  servant  shall,  no  matter  how 
deep  his  sympathy  and  regret,  steel  his  heart  and  do  his 
duty  by  refusing  to  let  the  wrong-doer  out.  My  experience 

1  of  the  way  in  which  pardons  are  often  granted  is  one  of  the 
reasons  why  I  do  not  believe  that  life  imprisonment  for 
murder  and  rape  is  a  proper  substitute  for  the  death  pen- 

'  alty.  The  average  term  of  so-called  life  imprisonment  in 
this  country  is  only  about  fourteen  years. 

[  Of  course  there  were  cases  where  I  either  commuted  sen 
tences  or  pardoned  offenders  with  very  real  pleasure.  For 
instance,  when  President,  I  frequently  commuted  sentences 
for  horse  stealing  in  the  Indian  Territory  because  the  pen 
alty  for  stealing  a  horse  was  disproportionate  to  the  penalty 
for  many  other  crimes,  and  the  offense  was  usually  com 
mitted  by  some  ignorant  young  fellow  who  found  a  half- 
wild  horse,  and  really  did  not  commit  anything  like  as  se- 


THE   NEW   YORK   GOVERNORSHIP  307 

rious  an  offense  as  the  penalty  indicated.  The  judges 
would  be  obliged  to  give  the  minimum  penalty,  but  would 
forward  me  memoranda  stating  that  if  there  had  been  a 
less  penalty  they  would  have  inflicted  it,  and  I  would  then 
commute  the  sentence  to  the  penalty  thus  indicated. 

In  one  case  in  New  York  I  pardoned  outright  a  man  con 
victed  of  murder  in  the  second  degree,  and  I  did  this  on  the 
recommendation  of  a  friend,  Father  Doyle  of  the  Paulist 
Fathers.  I  had  become  intimate  with  the  Paulist  Fathers 
while  I  was  Police  Commissioner,  and  I  had  grown  to  feel 
confidence  in  their  judgment,  for  I  had  found  that  they  al 
ways  told  me  exactly  what  the  facts  were  about  any  man, 
whether  he  belonged  to  their  church  or  not.  In  this  case  the 
convicted  man  was  a  strongly  built,  respectable  old  Irish 
man  employed  as  a  watchman  around  some  big  cattle-killing 
establishments.  The  young  roughs  of  the  neighborhood, 
which  was  then  of  a  rather  lawless  type,  used  to  try  to  de 
stroy  the  property  of  the  companies.  In  a  conflict  with  a 
watchman  a  member  of  one  of  the  gangs  was  slain.  The 
watchman  was  acquitted,  but  the  neighborhood  was  much 
wrought  up  over  the  acquittal.  Shortly  afterwards,  a  gang 
of  the  same  roughs  attacked  another  watchman,  the  old 
Irishman  in  question,  and  finally,  to  save  his  own  life,  he 
was  obliged  in  self-defense  to  kill  one  of  his  assailants.  The 
feeling  in  the  community,  however,  was  strongly  against 
him,  and  some  of  the  men  high  up  in  the  corporation  became 
frightened  and  thought  that  it  would  be  better  to  throw  over 
the  watchman.  He  was  convicted.  Father  Doyle  came  to 
me,  told  me  that  he  knew  the  man  well,  that  he  was  one  of 
the  best  members  of  his  church,  admirable  in  every  way, 
that  he  had  simply  been  forced  to  fight  for  his  life  while 
loyally  doing  his  duty,  and  that  the  conviction  represented 
the  triumph  of  the  tough  element  of  the  district  and  the 
abandonment  of  this  man,  by  those  who  should  have  stood 
by  him,  under  the  influence  of  an  unworthy  fear.  I  looked 
into  the  case,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Father  Doyle 
was  right,  and  gave  the  man  a  full  pardon  before  he  had 
served  thirty  days. 


308    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

The  various  clashes  between  myself  and  the  machine,  my 
triumph  in  them,  and  the  fact  that  the  people  were  getting 
more  and  more  interested  and  aroused,  brought  on  a  curious 
situation  in  the  Republican  National  Convention  at  Phila 
delphia  in  June,  1900.  Senator  Platt  and  the  New  York 
machine  leaders  had  become  very  anxious  to  get  me  out  of 
the  Governorship,  chiefly  because  of  the  hostility  of  the  big 
corporation  men  towrards  me ;  but  they  had  also  become  con 
vinced  that  there  was  such  popular  feeling  on  my  behalf 
that  it  would  be  difficult  to  refuse  me  a  renomination  if  I 
demanded  it.  They  accordingly  decided  to  push  me  for 
Vice-President,  taking  advantage  of  the  fact  that  there  was 
at  that  time  a  good  deal  of  feeling  for  me  in  the  country  at 
large.1  I  myself  did  not  appreciate  that  there  was  any  such 
feeling,  and  as  I  greatly  disliked  the  office  of  Vice-President 
and  was  much  interested  in  the  Governorship,  I  announced 
that  I  would  not  accept  the  Vice-Presidency.  I  was  one 
of  the  delegates  to  Philadelphia.  On  reaching  there  I  found 
that  the  situation  was  complicated.  Senator  Hanna  ap 
peared  on  the  surface  to  have  control  of  the  Convention. 
He  was  anxious  that  I  should  not  be  nominated  as  Vice- 
President.  Senator  Platt  was  anxious  that  I  should  be 
nominated  as  Vice-President,  in  order  to  get  me  out  of  the 
New  York  Governorship.  Each  took  a  position  opposite 
to  that  of  the  other,  but  each  at  that  time  cordially  sympa 
thized  with  the  other's  feelings  about  me — it  was  the  mani 
festations  and  not  the  feelings  that  differed.  My  sup 
porters  in  New  York  State  did  not  wish  me  nominated  for 
Vice-President  because  they  wished  me  to  continue  as  Gov 
ernor  ;  but  in  every  other  State  all  the  people  who  admired 
me  were  bound  that  I  should  be  nominated  as  Vice-Presi 
dent.  These  people  were  almost  all  desirous  of  seeing  Mr. 
McKinley  renominated  as  President,  but  they  became  angry 
at  Senator  Hanna 's  opposition  to  me  as  Vice-President. 
He  in  his  turn  suddenly  became  aware  that  if  he  persisted 
he  might  find  that  in  their  anger  these  men  would  oppose 
Mr.  McKinley 's  renomination,  and  although  they  could  not 

iSee  Appendix  B  to  this  chapter. 


THE    NEW   YORK    GOVERNORSHIP  309 

have  prevented  the  nomination,  such  opposition  would  have 
been  a  serious  blow  in  the  campaign  which  was  to  follow. 
Senator  Hanna,  therefore,  began  to  waver. 

Meanwhile  a  meeting  of  the  New  York  delegation  was 
called.  Most  of  the  delegates  were  under  the  control  of 
Senator  Platt.  The  Senator  notified  me  that  if  I  refused  to 
accept  the  nomination  for  Vice-President  I  would  be  beaten 
for  the  nomination  for  Governor.  I  answered  that  I  would 
accept  the  challenge,  that  we  would  have  a  straight-out 
fight  on  the  proposition,  and  that  I  would  begin  it  at  once 
by  telling  the  assembled  delegates  of  the  threat,  and  giving 
fair  warning  that  I  intended  to  fight  for  the  Governorship 
nomination,  and,  moreover,  that  I  intended  to  get  it.  This 
brought  Senator  Platt  to  terms.  The  effort  to  instruct  the 
New  York  delegation  for  me  was  abandoned,  and  Lieuten 
ant-Governor  Woodruff  was  presented  for  nomination  in 
my  place. 

I  supposed  that  this  closed  the  incident,  and  that  no 
further  effort  would  be  made  to  nominate  me  for  the  Vice- 
Presidency.  On  the  contrary,  the  effect  was  directly  the  re 
verse.  The  upset  of  the  New  York  machine  increased  the 
feeling  of  the  delegates  from  other  States  that  it  was  neces 
sary  to  draft  me  for  the  nomination.  By  next  day  Senator 
Hanna  himself  concluded  that  this  was  a  necessity,  and 
acquiesced  in  the  movement.  As  New  York  was  already 
committed  against  me,  and  as  I  was  not  willing  that  there 
should  be  any  chance  of  supposing  that  the  New  Yorkers 
had  nominated  me  to  get  rid  of  me,  the  result  was  that  I  was 
nominated  and  seconded  from  outside  States.  No  other 
candidate  was  placed  in  the  field. 

By  this  time  the  Legislature  had  adjourned,  and  most  of 
my  work  as  Governor  of  New  York  was  over.  One  unex 
pected  bit  of  business  arose,  however.  It  was  the  year  of 
the  Presidential  campaign.  Tammany,  which  had  been  luke 
warm  about  Bryan  in  1896,  cordially  supported  him  in  1900 ; 
and  when  Tammany  heartily  supports  a  candidate  it  is  well 
for  the  opposing  candidate  to  keep  a  sharp  lookout  for  elec 
tion  frauds.  The  city  government  was  in  the  hands  of  Tarn- 


310    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

many ;  but  I  had  power  to  remove  the  Mayor,  the  Sheriff, 
and  the  District  Attorney  for  malfeasance  or  misfeasance 
in  office.  Such  power  had  not  been  exercised  by  any  pre 
vious  Governor,  as  far  as  I  knew;  but  it  existed,  and  if  the 
misfeasance  or  malfeasance  warranted  it,  and  if  the  Gov 
ernor  possessed  the  requisite  determination,  the  power 
could  be,  and  ought  to  be,  exercised. 

By  an  Act  of  the  Legislature,  a  State  Bureau  of  Elections 
had  been  created  in  New  York  City,  and  a  Superintendent 
of  Elections  appointed  by  the  Governor.  The  Chief  of  the 
State  Bureau  of  Elections  was  John  McCullagh,  formerly 
in  the  Police  Department  when  I  was  Police  Commissioner. 
The  Chief  of  Police  for  the  city  was  William  F.  Devery,  one 
of  the  Tammany  leaders,  who  represented  in  the  Police  De 
partment  all  that  I  had  warred  against  while  Commissioner. 
On  November  4  Devery  directed  his  subordinates  in  the 
Police  Department  to  disregard  the  orders  which  Mc 
Cullagh  had  given  to  his  deputies,  orders  which  were  essen 
tial  if  we  were  to  secure  on  honest  election  in  the  city.  I 
had  just  returned  from  a  Western  campaign  trip,  and  was 
at  Sagamore  Hill.  I  had  no  direct  power  over  Devery ;  but 
the  Mayor  had ;  and  I  had  power  over  the  Mayor.  Accord 
ingly,  I  at  once  wrote  to  the  Mayor  of  New  York,  to  the 
Sheriff  of  New  York,  and  to  the  District  Attorney  of  New 
York  County  the  following  letters : 

STATE   OF   NEW   YORK 

OYSTER  BAY,  November  5,  1900. 

To  the  Mayor  of  the  City  of  New  York. 

Sir:  My  attention  has  been  called  to  the  official  order 
issued  by  Chief  of  Police  Devery,  in  which  he  directs  his 
subordinates  to  disregard  the  Chief  of  the  State  Election 
Bureau,  John  McCullagh,  and  his  deputies.  Unless  you 
have  already  taken  steps  to  secure  the  recall  of  this  order, 
it  is  necessary  for  me  to  point  out  that  I  shall  be  obliged 
to  hold  you  responsible  as  the  head  of  the  city  government 
for  the  action  of  the  Chief  of  Police,  if  it  should  result  in 


THE   NEW   YORK   GOVERNORSHIP  311 

any  breach  of  the  peace  and  intimidation  or  any  crime  what 
ever  against  the  election  laws.  The  State  and  city  au 
thorities  should  work  together.  I  will  not  fail  to  call  to  sum 
mary  account  either  State  or  city  authority  in  the  event  of 
either  being  guilty  of  intimidation  or  connivance  at  fraud 
or  of  failure  to  protect  every  legal  voter  in  his  rights.  I 
therefore  hereby  notify  you  that  in  the  event  of  any  wrong 
doing  following  upon  the  failure  immediately  to  recall  Chief 
Devery 's  order,  or  upon  any  action  or  inaction  on  the  part 
of  Chief  Devery,  I  must  necessarily  call  you  to  account. 

Yours,  etc., 

THEODORE  ROOSEVELT. 

STATE  OF  NEW  YORK 

OYSTER  BAY,  .November  5,  1900. 

To  the  Sheriff  of  the  County  of  New  York. 

Sir:  My  attention  has  been  called  to  the  official  order 
issued  by  Chief  of  Police  Devery  in  which  he  directs  his 
subordinates  to  disregard  the  Chief  of  the  State  Election 
Bureau,  John  McCullagh,  and  his  deputies. 

It  is  your  duty  to  assist  in  the  orderly  enforcement  of  the 
law,  and  I  shall  hold  you  strictly  responsible  for  any  breach 
of  the  public  peace  within  your  county,  or  for  any  failure  on 
your  part  to  do  your  full  duty  in  connection  with  the  elec 
tion  to-morrow.  Yours  truly, 

THEODORE  ROOSEVELT. 

STATE  OF  NEW  YORK 

OYSTER  BAY,  November  5,  1900. 

To  the  District  Attorney  of  the  County  of  New  York. 

Sir:  My  attention  has  been  called  to  the  official  order 
issued  by  Chief  of  Police  Devery,  in  which  he  directs  his 
subordinates  to  disregard  the  Chief  of  the  State  Election 
Bureau,  John  McCullagh,  and  his  deputies. 

In  view  of  this  order  I  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that 
it  is  your  duty  to  assist  in  the  orderly  enforcement  of  the 


312    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT—AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

law,  and  there-  must  be  no  failure  on  your  part  to  do  your 
full  duty  in  the  matter.  Yours  truly, 

THEODORE  EOOSEVELT. 

These  letters  had  the  desired  effect.  The  Mayor  promptly 
required  Chief  Devery  to  rescind  the  obnoxious  order,  which 
was  as  promptly  done.  The  Sheriff  also  took  prompt  ac 
tion.  The  District  Attorney  refused  to  heed  my  letter,  and 
assumed  an  attitude  of  defiance,  and  I  removed  him  from 
office.  On  election  day  there  was  no  clash  between  the  city 
and  State  authorities ;  the  election  was  orderly  and  honest. 


APPENDIX   A 

CONSERVATION 

As  foreshadowing  the  course  I  later,  as  President,  followed  in 
this  matter,  I  give  extracts  from  one  of  my  letters  to  the  Commis 
sion,  and  from  my  second  (and  last)  Annual  Message.  I  spent  the 
first  months  of  my  term  in  investigations  to  find  out  just  what  the 
situation  was. 

On  November  28,  1899,  I  wrote  to  the  Commission  as  follows: 

"...  I  have  had  very  many  complaints  before  this  as  to  the 
inefficiency  of  the  game  wardens  and  game  protectors,  the  com 
plaints  usually  taking  the  form  that  the  men  have  been  appointed 
and  are  retained  without  due  regard  to  the  duties  to  be  performed. 
I  do  not  wish  a  man  to  be  retained  or  appointed  who  is  not  thor 
oughly  fit  to  perform  the  duties  of  game  protector.  The  Adiron- 
dacks  are  entitled  to  a  peculiar  share  of  the  Commission's 
attention,  both  from  the  standpoint  of  forestry,  and  from  the  less 
important,  but  still  very  important,  standpoint  of  game  and  fish 
protection.  The  men  who  do  duty  as  game  protectors  in  the 
Adirondacks  should,  by  preference,  be  appointed  from  the  locality 
itself,  and  should  in  all  cases  be  thorough  woodsmen.  The  mere 
fact  that  a  game  protector  has  to  hire  a  guide  to  pilot  him  through 
the  woods  is  enough  to  show  his  unfitness  for  the  position.  I  want 
as  game  protectors  men  of  courage,  resolution,  and  hardihood, 
who  can  handle  the  rifle,  ax,  and  paddle;  who  can  camp  out  in 
summer  or  winter;  who  can  go  on  snow-shoes,  if  necessary;  who 
can  go  through  the  woods  by  day  or  by  night  without  regard  to 
trails. 

"I  should  like  full  information  about  all  your  employees,  as  to 
their  capacities,  as  to  the  labor  they  perform,  as  to  their  distri 
bution  from  and  where  they  do  their  work.'* 

Many  of  the  men  hitherto  appointed  owed  their  positions  prin 
cipally  to  political  preference.  The  changes  I  recommended  were 
promptly  made,  and  much  to  the  good  of  the  public  service.  In 
my  Annual  Message,  in  January,  1900,  I  said: 

"Great  progress  has  been  made  through  the  fish  hatcheries  in 
the  propagation  of  valuable  food  and  sporting  fish.  The  laws  for 
the  protection  of  deer  have  resulted  in  their  increase.  Neverthe 
less,  as  railroads  tend  te  encroach  on  the  wilderness,  the  tempta- 

313 


314    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

tion  to  illegal  hunting  becomes  greater,  and  the  danger  from  forest 
fires  increases.  There  is  need  of  great  improvement  both  in  our 
laws  and  in  their  administration.  The  game  wardens  have  been 
too  few  in  number.  More  should  be  provided.  None  save  fit 
men  must  be  appointed;  and  their  retention  in  office  must  depend 
purely  upon  the  zeal,  ability,  and  efficiency  with  which  they  per 
form  their  duties.  The  game  wardens  in  the  forests  must  be  woods 
men;  and  they  should  have  no  outside  business.  In  short,  there 
should  be  a  thorough  reorganization  of  the  work  of  the  Commis 
sion.  A  careful  study  of  the  resources  and  condition  of  the  forests 
on  State  land  must  be  made.  It  is  certainly  not  too  much  to 
expect  that  the  State  forests  should  be  managed  as  efficiently  as 
the  forests  on  private  lands  in  the  same  neighborhoods.  And  the 
measure  of  difference  in  efficiency  of  management  must  be  the 
measure  of  condemnation  or  praise  of  the  way  the  public  forests 
have  been  managed. 

"The  subject  of  forest  preservation  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
to  the  State.  The  Adirondacks  and  Catskills  should  be  great 
parks  kept  in  perpetuity  for  the  benefit  and  enjoyment  of  our 
people.  Much  has  been  done  of  late  years  towards  their  preserva 
tion,  but  very  much  remains  to  be  done.  The  provisions  of  law  in 
reference  to  sawmills  and  wood-pulp  mills  are  defective  and  should 
be  changed  so  as  to  prohibit  dumping  dye-stuff,  sawdust,  or  tan- 
bark,  in  any  amount  whatsoever,  into  the  streams.  Reservoirs 
should  be  made,  but  not  where  they  will  tend  to  destroy  large 
sections  of  the  forest,  and  only  after  a  careful  and  scientific  study 
of  the  water  resources  of  the  region.  The  people  of  the  forest 
regions  are  themselves  growing  more  and  more  to  realize  the  neces 
sity  of  preserving  both  the  trees  and  the  game.  A  live  deer  in  the 
woods  will  attract  to  the  neighborhood  ten  times  the  money  that 
could  be  obtained  for  the  deer's  dead  carcass.  Timber  theft  on 
the  State  lands  is,  of  course,  a  grave  offense  against  the  whole 
public. 

"Hardy  outdoor  sports,  like  hunting,  are  in  themselves  of  no 
small  value  to  the  National  character  and  should  be  encouraged 
in  every  way.  Men  who  go  into  the  wilderness,  indeed,  men  who 
take  part  in  any  field  sports  with  horse  or  rifle,  receive  a  benefit 
which  can  hardly  be  given  by  even  the  most  vigorous  athletic 
games. 

"There  is  a  further  and  more  immediate  and  practical  end  in 
view.  A  primeval  forest  is  a  great  sponge  which  absorbs  and 
distills  the  rain  water.  And  when  it  is  destroyed  the  result  is 
apt  to  be  an  alternation  of  flood  and  drought.  Forest  fires  ulti 
mately  make  the  land  a  desert,  and  are  a  detriment  to  all  that  por 
tion  of  the  State  tributary  to  the  streams  through  the  woods  where 


APPENDIX  315 

they  occur.  Every  effort  should  be  made  to  minimize  their  de 
structive  influence.  We  need  to  have  our  system  of  forestry 
gradually  developed  and  conducted  along  scientific  principles. 
When  this  has  been  done  it  will  be  possible  to  allow  marketable 
lumber  to  be  cut  everywhere  without  damage  to  the  forests — 
indeed,  with  positive  advantage  to  them.  But  until  lumbering  is 
thus  conducted,  on  strictly  scientific  principles  no  less  than  upon 
principles  of  the  strictest  honesty  toward  the  State,  we  cannot 
afford  to  suffer  it  at  all  in  the  State  forests.  Unrestrained  greed 
means  the  ruin  of  the  great  woods  and  the  drying  up  of  the  sources 
of  the  rivers. 

"Ultimately  the  administration  of  the  State  lands  must  be  so 
centralized  as  to  enable  us  definitely  to  place  responsibility  in 
respect  to  everything  concerning  them,  and  to  demand  the  highest 
degree  of  trained  intelligence  in  their  use. 

'  *  The  State  should  not  permit  within  its  limits  factories  to  make 
bird  skins  or  bird  feathers  into  articles  of  ornament  or  wearing 
apparel.  Ordinary  birds,  and  especially  song  birds,  should  be 
rigidly  protected.  Game  birds  should  never  be  shot  to  a  greater 
extent  than  will  offset  the  natural  rate  of  increase.  .  .  .  Care 
should  be  taken  not  to  encourage  the  use  of  cold  storage  or  other 
market  systems  which  are  a  benefit  to  no  one  but  the  wealthy 
epicure  who  can  afford  to  pay  a  heavy  price  for  luxuries.  These 
systems  tend  to  the  destruction  of  the  game,  which  would  bear 
most  severely  upon  the  very  men  whose  rapacity  has  been  appealed 
to  in  order  to  secure  its  extermination.  .  .  ." 

I  reorganized  the  Commission,  putting  Austin  Wadsworth  at  its 
head. 

APPENDIX   B 

THE   POLITICAL   SITUATION  IN   1900 

My  general  scheme  of  action  as  Governor  was  given  in  a  letter  I 
wrote  one  of  my  supporters  among  the  independent  district  organ 
ization  leaders,  Norton  Goddard,  on  April  16,  1900.  It  runs  in 
part  as  follows:  "Nobody  can  tell,  and  least  of  all  the  machine 
itself,  whether  the  machine  intends  to  renominate  me  next  fall  or 
not.  If  for  some  reason  I  should  be  weak,  whether  on  account  of 
faults  or  virtues,  doubtless  the  machine  will  throw  me  over,  and 
I  think  I  am  not  uncharitable  when  I  say  they  would  feel  no  acute 
grief  at  so  doing.  It  would  be  very  strange  if  they  did  feel  such 
grief.  If,  for  instance,  we  had  strikes  which  led  to  riots,  I  would 
of  course  be  obliged  to  preserve  order  and  stop  the  riots.  Decent 
citizens  would  demand  that  I  should  do  it,  and  in  any  event  I 


316    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

should  do  it  wholly  without  regard  to  their  demands.  But,  once 
it  was  done,  they  would  forget  all  about  it,  while  a  great  many 
laboring  men,  honest  but  ignorant  and  prejudiced,  would  bear  a 
grudge  against  me  for  doing  it.  This  might  put  me  out  of  the  run 
ning  as  a  candidate.  Again,  the  big  corporations  undoubtedly  want 
to  beat  me.  They  prefer  the  chance  of  being  blackmailed  to  the 
certainty  that  they  will  not  be  allowed  any  more  than  their  due. 
Of  course  they  will  try  to  beat  me  on  some  entirely  different  issue, 
and,  as  they  are  very  able  and  very  unscrupulous,  nobody  can  tell 
that  they  won't  succeed.  ...  I  have  been  trying  to  stay  in  with 
the  organization.  I  did  not  do  it  with  the  idea  that  they  would 
renominate  me.  I  did  it  with  the  idea  of  getting  things  done,  and 
in  that  I  have  been  absolutely  successful.  Whether  Senator  Platt 
and  Mr.  Odell  endeavor  to  beat  me,  or  do  beat  me,  for  the  renomi- 
nation  next  fall,  is  of  very  small  importance  compared  to  the  fact 
that  for  my  two  years  I  have  been  able  to  make  a  Republican  ma 
jority  in  the  Legislature  do  good  and  decent  work  and  have  pre 
vented  any  split  within  the  party.  The  task  was  one  of  great 
difficulty,  because,  on  the  one  hand,  I  had  to  keep  clearly  before 
me  the  fact  that  it  was  better  to  have  a  split  than  to  permit  bad 
work  to  be  done,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  to  have  that 
split  would  absolutely  prevent  all  good  work.  The  result  has  been 
that  I  have  avoided  a  split  and  that  as  a  net  result  of  my  two  years 
and  the  two  sessions  of  the  Legislature,  there  has  been  an  enormous 
improvement  in  the  administration  of  the  Government,  and  there 
has  also  been  a  great  advance  in  legislation. ' ' 

To  show  my  reading  of  the  situation  at  the  time,  I  quote  from  a 
letter  of  mine  to  Joseph  B.  Bishop,  then  editor  of  the  Commercial 
Advertiser,  with  whom  towards  the  end  of  my  term  I  had  grown 
into  very  close  relations,  and  who,  together  with  two  other  old 
friends,  Albert  Shaw,  of  the  Review  of  Reviews,  and  Silas  Mc- 
Bee,  now  editor  of  the  Constructive  Quarterly,  knew  the  inside 
of  every  movement,  so  far  as  I  knew  it  myself.  The  letter,  which 
is  dated  April  11,  1900,  runs  in  part  as  follows:  "The  dangerous 
element  as  far  as  I  am  concerned  comes  from  the  corporations. 
The  [naming  certain  men]  crowd  and  those  like  them  have  been 
greatly  exasperated  by  the  franchise  tax.  They  would  like  to  get 
me  out  of  politics  for  good,  but  at  the  moment,  they  think  the  best 
thing  to  do  is  to  put  me  into  the  Vice-Presidency.  Naturally  I 
will  not  be  opposed  openly  on  the  ground  of  the  corporations' 
grievance;  but  every  kind  of  false  statement  will  continually  be 
made,  and  men  like  [naming  the  editors  of  certain  newspapers] 
will  attack  me,  not  as  the  enemy  of  corporations,  but  as  their 
tool!  There  is  no  question  whatever  that  if  the  leaders  can  they 
will  upset  me.  * ' 


APPENDIX  317 

One  position  which  as  Governor  (and  as  President)  I  consistently 
took,  seems  to  me  to  represent  what  ought  to  be  a  fundamental 
principle  in  American  legislative  work.  I  steadfastly  refused  to 
advocate  any  law,  no  matter  how  admirable  in  theory,  if  there  was 
good  reason  to  believe  that  in  practice  it  would  not  be  executed. 
I  have  always  sympathized  with  the  view  set  forth  by  Pelatiah 
Webster  in  1783 — quoted  by  Hannis  Taylor  in  his  Genesis  of  the 
Supreme  Court — "Laws  or  ordinances  of  any  kind  (especially  of 
august  bodies  of  high  dignity  and  consequence)  which  fail  of 
execution,  are  much  worse  than  none.  They  weaken  the  govern 
ment,  expose  it  to  contempt,  destroy  the  confidence  of  all  men, 
native  and  foreigners,  in  it,  and  expose  both  aggregate  bodies  and 
individuals  who  have  placed  confidence  in  it  to  many  ruinous 
disappointments  which  they  would  have  escaped  had  no  such  law 
or  ordinance  been  made."  This  principle,  by  the  way,  not  only 
applies  to  an  internal  law  which  cannot  be  executed;  it  applies 
even  more  to  international  action,  such  as  a  universal  arbitration 
treaty  which  cannot  and  will  not  be  kept ;  and  most  of  all  it  ap 
plies  to  proposals  to  make  such  universal  arbitration  treaties  at 
the  very  time  that  we  are  not  keeping  our  solemn  promise  to 
execute  limited  arbitration  treaties  which  we  have  already  made. 
A  general  arbitration  treaty  is  merely  a  promise;  it  represents 
merely  a  debt  of  honorable  obligation;  and  nothing  is  more  dis 
creditable,  for  a  nation  or  an  individual,  than  to  cover  up  the 
repudiation  of  a  debt  which  can  be  and  ought  to  be  paid,  by* 
recklessly  promising  to  incur  a  new  and  insecure  debt  which  no 
wise  man  for  one  m«ment  supposes  ever  will  be  paid. 


CHAPTEE   IX 

OUTDOORS  AND   INDOORS 

THERE  are  men  who  love  out-of-doors  who  yet  never  open 
a  book;  and  other  men  who  love  books  but  to  whom  the 
great  book  of  nature  is  a  sealed  volume,  and  the  lines  writ 
ten  therein  blurred  and  illegible.  Nevertheless  among  those 
men  whom  I  have  known  the  love  of  books  and  the  love  of 
outdoors,  in  their  highest  expressions,  have  usually  gone 
hand  in  hand.  It  is  an  affectation  for  the  man  who  is  prais 
ing  outdoors  to  sneer  at  books.  Usually  the  keenest  appre 
ciation  of  what  is  seen  in  nature  is  to  be  found  in  those  who 
have  also  profited  by  the  hoarded  and  recorded  wisdom  of 
their  fellow-men.  Love  of  outdoor  life,  love  of  simple  and 
hardy  pastimes,  can  be  gratified  by  men  and  women  who  do 
not  possess  large  means,  and  who  work  hard;  and  so  can 
love  of  good  books — not  of  good  bindings  and  of  first  edi 
tions,  excellent  enough  in  their  way  but  sheer  luxuries — I 
mean  love  of  reading  books,  owning  them  if  possible  of 
course,  but,  if  that  is  not  possible,  getting  them  from  a  cir 
culating  library. 

Sagamore  Hill  takes  its  name  from  the  old  Sagamore 
Mohannis,  who,  as  chief  of  his  little  tribe,  signed  away  his 
rights  to  the  land  two  centuries  and  a  half  ago.  The  house 
stands  right  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  separated  by  fields  and 
belts  of  woodland  from  all  other  houses,  and  looks  out  over 
the  bay  and  the  Sound.  We  see  the  sun  go  down  beyond 
long  reaches  of  land  and  of  water.  Many  birds  dwell  in 
the  trees  round  the  house  or  in  the  pastures  and  the  woods 
near  by,  and  of  course  in  winter  gulls,  loons,  and  wild  fowl 
frequent  the  waters  of  the  bay  and  the  Sound.  We  love  all 
the  seasons ;  the  snows  and  bare  woods  of  winter ;  the  rush 

818 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS         319 

of  growing  things  and  the  blossom-spray  of  spring;  the 
yellow  grain,  the  ripening  fruits  and  tasseled  corn,  and  the 
deep,  leafy  shades  that  are  heralded  by  "the  green  dance  of 
summer";  and  the  sharp  fall  winds  that  tear  the  brilliant 
banners  with  which  the  trees  greet  the  dying  year. 

The  Sound  is  always  lovely.  In  the  summer  nights  we 
watch  it  from  the  piazza,  and  see  the  lights  of  the  tall  Fall 
Kiver  boats  as  they  steam  steadily  by.  Now  and  then  we 
spend  a  day  on  it,  the  two  of  us  together  in  the  light  rowing 
skiff,  or  perhaps  with  one  of  the  boys  to  pull  an  extra  pair 
of  oars ;  we  land  for  lunch  at  noon  under  wind-beaten  oaks 
on  the  edge  of  a  low  bluff,  or  among  the  wild  plum  bushes 
on  a  spit  of  white  sand,  while  the  sails  of  the  coasting 
schooners  gleam  in  the  sunlight,  and  the  tolling  of  the  bell- 
buoy  comes  landward  across  the  waters. 

Long  Island  is  not  as  rich  in  flowers  as  the  valley  of  the 
Hudson.  Yet  there  are  many.  Early  in  April  there  is  one 
hillside  near  us  which  glows  like  a  tender  flame  with  the 
white  of  the  bloodroot.  About  the  same  time  we  find  the 
shy  mayflower,  the  trailing  arbutus ;  and  although  we  rarely 
pick  wild  flowers,  one  member  of  the  household  always 
plucks  a  little  bunch  of  mayflowers  to  send  to  a  friend 
working  in  Panama,  whose  soul  hungers  for  the  Northern 
spring.  Then  there  are  shadblow  and  delicate  anemones, 
about  the  time  of  the  cherry  blossoms ;  the  brief  glory  of  the 
apple  orchards  follows;  and  then  the  thronging  dogwoods 
fill  the  forests  with  their  radiance;  and  sc  flowers  follow 
flowers  until  the  springtime  splendor  closes  with  the  laurel 
and  the  evanescent,  honey-sweet  locust  bloom.  The  late 
summer  flowers  follow,  the  flaunting  lilies,  and  cardinal 
flowers,  and  marshmallows,  and  pale  beach  rosemary;  and 
the  goldenrod  and  the  asters  when  the  afternoons  shorten 
and  we  again  begin  to  think  of  fires  in  the  wide  fireplaces. 

Most  of  the  birds  in  our  neighborhood  are  the  ordinary 
home  friends  of  the  house  and  the  barn,  the  wood  lot  and 
the  pasture ;  but  now  and  then  the  species  make  queer  shifts. 
The  cheery  quail,  alas !  are  rarely  found  near  us  now ;  and 
we  no  longer  hear  the  whip-poor-wills  at  night.  But  some 


320    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

birds  visit  us  now  which  formerly  did  not.  "When  I  was  a 
boy  neither  the  black-throated  green  warbler  nor  the  purple 
finch  nested  around  us,  nor  were  bobolinks  found  in  our 
fields.  The  black-throated  green  warbler  is  now  one  of  our 
commonest  summer  warblers;  there  are  plenty  of  purple 
finches ;  and,  best  of  all,  the  bobolinks  are  far  from  infre 
quent.  I  had  written  about  these  new  visitors  to  John 
Burroughs,  and  once  when  he  came  out  to  see  me  I  was  able 
to  show  them  to  him. 

When  I  wras  President,  we  owned  a  little  house  in  western 
Virginia ;  a  delightful  house,  to  us  at  least,  although  only  a 
shell  of  rough  boards.  We  used  sometimes  to  go  there  in 
the  fall,  perhaps  at  Thanksgiving,  and  on  these  occasions 
we  would  have  quail  and  rabbits  of  our  own  shooting,  and 
once  in  a  while  a  wild  turkey.  We  also  went  there  in  the 
spring.  Of  course  many  of  the  birds  were  different  from 
our  Long  Island  friends.  There  were  mocking-birds,  the 
most  attractive  of  all  birds,  and  blue  grosbeaks,  and  cardi 
nals  and  summer  redbirds,  instead  of  scarlet  tanagers,  and 
those  wonderful  singers  the  Bewick's  wrens,  and  Carolina 
wrens.  All  these  I  was  able  to  show  John  Burroughs  when 
he  came  to  visit  us ;  although,  by  the  way,  he  did  not  appre 
ciate  as  much  as  we  did  one  set  of  inmates  of  the  cottage — 
the  flying  squirrels.  We  loved  having  the  flying  squirrels, 
father  and  mother  and  half-grown  young,  in  their  nest 
among  the  rafters ;  and  at  night  we  slept  so  soundly  that  we 
did  not  in  the  least  mind  the  wild  gambols  of  the  little  fel 
lows  through  the  rooms,  even  when,  as  sometimes  happened, 
they  would  swoop  down  to  the  bed  and  scuttle  across  it. 

One  April  I  went  to  Yellowstone  Park,  when  the  snow  was 
still  very  deep,  and  I  took  John  Burroughs  with  me.  I 
wished  to  show  him  the  big  game  of  the  Park,  the  wild  crea 
tures  that  have  become  so  astonishingly  tame  and  tolerant 
of  human  presence.  In  the  Yellowstone  the  animals  seem 
always  to  behave  as  one  wishes  them  to !  It  is  always  pos 
sible  to  see  the  sheep  and  deer  and  antelope,  and  also  the 
great  herds  of  elk,  which  are  shyer  than  the  smaller  beasts. 
In  April  we  found  the  elk  weak  after  the  short  commons 


Copyright  by  Gari  Melchers.     Reproduced  from  a  "Thistle  Print"  copyright  by  The  Detroit 
Publishing  Company.     From  a  painting  by  Gari  Melchers. 

THEODORE  ROOSEVELT  IN  WINTER  RIDING  COSTUME. 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS         321 

and  hard  living  of  winter.  Once  without  much  difficulty 
I  regularly  rounded  up  a  big  band  of  them,  so  that  John 
Burroughs  could  look  at  them.  I  do  not  think,  however, 
that  he  cared  to  see  them  as  much  as  I  did.  The  birds  in 
terested  him  more,  especially  a  tiny  owl  the  size  of  a  robin 
which  wre  saw  perched  on  the  top  of  a  tree  in  mid-afternoon 
entirely  uninfluenced  by  the  sun  and  making  a  queer  noise 
like  a  cork  being  pulled  from  a  bottle.  I  was  rather  ashamed 
to  find  how  much  better  his  eyes  were  than  mine  in  seeing 
the  birds  and  grasping  their  differences. 

When  wolf-hunting  in  Texas,  and  when  bear-hunting  in 
Louisiana  and  Mississippi,  I  was  not  only  enthralled  by  the 
sport,  but  also  by  the  strange  new  birds  and  other  creatures, 
and  the  trees  and  flowers  I  had  not  known  before.  By  the 
way,  there  was  one  feast  at  the  White  House  which  stands 
above  all  others  in  my  memory — even  above  the  time  when 
I  lured  Joel  Chandler  Harris  thither  for  a  night,  a  deed 
in  which  to  triumph,  as  all  who  knew  that  inveterately  shy 
recluse  will  testify.  This  was  "the  bear-hunters'  dinner. " 
I  had  been  treated  so  kindly  by  my  friends  on  these  hunts, 
and  they  were  such  fine  fellows,  men  whom  I  was  so  proud 
to  think  of  as  Americans,  that  I  set  my  heart  on  having 
them  at  a  hunters'  dinner  at  the  White  House.  One  De 
cember  I  succeeded;  there  were  twenty  or  thirty  of  them, 
all  told,  as  good  hunters,  as  daring  riders,  as  first-class 
citizens  as  could  be  found  anywhere ;  no  finer  set  of  guests 
ever  sat  at  meat  in  the  White  House;  and  among  other 
game  on  the  table  was  a  black  bear,  itself  contributed  by 
one  of  these  same  guests. 

When  I  first  visited  Calif ornia,  it  was  my  good  fortune  to 
see  the  "big  trees,"  the  Sequoias,  and  then  to  travel  down 
into  the  Yosemite,  with  John  Muir.  Of  course  of  all  people 
in  the  world  he  was  the  one  with  whom  it  was  best  worth 
while  thus  to  see  the  Yosemite.  He  told  me  that  when 
Emerson  came  to  California  he  tried  to  get  him  to  come  out 
and  camp  with  him,  for  that  was  the  only  way  in  which  to 
see  at  their  best  the  majesty  and  charm  of  the  Sierras.  But 
at  the  time  Emerson  was  getting  old  and  could  not  go.  John 


322    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Muir  met  me  with  a  couple  of  packers  and  two  mules  to 
carry  our  tent,  bedding,  and  food  for  a  three  days'  trip. 
The  first  night  was  clear,  and  we  lay  down  in  the  darkening 
aisles  of  the  great  Sequoia  grove.  The  majestic  trunks, 
beautiful  in  color  and  in  symmetry,  rose  round  us  like  the 
pillars  of  a  mightier  cathedral  than  ever  was  conceived  even 
by  the  fervor  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Hermit  thrushes  sang 
beautifully  in  the  evening,  and  again,  with  a  burst  of  won 
derful  music,  at  dawn.  I  was  interested  and  a  little  sur 
prised  to  find  that,  unlike  John  Burroughs,  John  Muir 
cared  little  for  birds  or  bird  songs,  and  knew  little  about 
them.  The  hermit  thrushes  meant  nothing  to  him,  the  trees 
and  the  flowers  and  the  cliffs  everything.  The  only  birds 
he  noticed  or  cared  for  were  some  that  were  very  conspicu 
ous,  such  as  the  water-ousels — always  particular  favorites 
of  mine  too.  The  second  night  we  camped  in  a  snow-storm, 
on  the  edge  of  the  canon  walls,  under  the  spreading  limbs 
of  a  grove  of  mighty  silver  fir ;  and  next  day  we  went  down 
into  the  wonderland  of  the  valley  itself.  I  shall  always 
be  glad  that  I  was  in  the  Yosemite  with  John  Muir  and  in 
the  Yellowstone  with  John  Burroughs. 

Like  most  Americans  interested  in  birds  and  books,  I 
know  a  good  deal  about  English  birds  as  they  appear  in 
books.  I  know  the  lark  of  Shakespeare  and  Shelley  and  the 
Ettrick  Shepherd;  I  know  the  nightingale  of  Milton  and 
Keats;  I  know  Wordsworth's  cuckoo;  I  know  mavis  and 
merle  singing  in  the  merry  green  wood  of  the  old  ballads ; 
I  know  Jenny  Wren  and  Cock  Eobin  of  the  nursery  books. 
Therefore  I  had  always  much  desired  to  hear  the  birds  in 
real  life;  and  the  opportunity  offered  in  June,  1910,  when 
I  spent  two  or  three  weeks  in  England.  As  I  could  snatch 
but  a  few  hours  from  a  very  exacting  round  of  pleasures 
and  duties,  it  was  necessary  for  me  to  be  with  some  com 
panion  who  could  identify  both  song  and  singer.  In  Sir 
Edward  Grey,  a  keen  lover  of  outdoor  life  in  all  its  phases, 
and  a  delightful  companion,  who  knows  the  songs  and  ways 
of  English  birds  as  very  few  do  know  them,  I  found  the 
best  possible  guide. 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS         323 

We  left  London  on  the  morning  of  June  9,  twenty-four 
hours  before  I  sailed  from  Southampton.  Getting  off  the 
train  at  Basingstoke,  we  drove  to  the  pretty,  smiling  valley 
of  the  Itchen.  Here  we  tramped  for  three  or  four  hours, 
then  again  drove,  this  time  to  the  edge  of  the  New  Forest, 
where  we  first  took  tea  at  an  inn,  and  then  tramped  through 
the  forest  to  an  inn  on  its  other  side,  at  Brockenhurst.  At 
the  conclusion  of  our  walk  my  companion  made  a  list  of  the 
birds  we  had  seen,  putting  an  asterisk  (*)  opposite  those 
which  we  had  heard  sing.  There  were  forty-one  of  the 
former  and  twenty- three  of  the  latter,  as  follows: 

*  Thrush,   *  blackbird,   *  lark,    *  yellowhammer,   *  robin, 

*  wren,     *  golden-crested    wren,     *  goldfinch,     *  chaffinch, 

*  greenfinch,  pied  wagtail,  sparrow,  *  dunnock  (hedge,  ac 
centor),  missel  thrush,  starling,  rook,  jackdaw,  *  blackcap, 

*  garden   warbler,    *  willow   warbler,    *  chiffchaff,    *  wood 
warbler,  tree-creeper,  *  reed  bunting,  *  sedge  warbler,  coot, 
water  hen,  little  grebe  (dabchick),  tufted  duck,  wood  pigeon, 
stock  dove,  *  turtle  dove,  peewit,  tit  (fcoal  tit),  *  cuckoo, 

*  nightjar,  *  swallow,  martin,  swift,  pheasant,  partridge. 

The  valley  of  the  Itchen  is  typically  the  England  that  we 
know  from  novel  and  story  and  essay.  It  is  very  beautiful 
in  every  way,  with  a  rich,  civilized,  fertile  beauty — the 
rapid  brook  twisting  among  its  reed  beds,  the  rich  green  of 
trees  and  grass,  the  stately  woods,  the  gardens  and  fields, 
the  exceedingly  picturesque  cottages,  the  great  handsome 
houses  standing  in  their  parks.  Birds  were  plentiful;  I 
know  but  few  places  in  America  where  one  would  see  such 
an  abundance  of  individuals,  and  I  was  struck  by  seeing 
such  large  birds  as  coots,  water  hens,  grebes,  tufted  ducks, 
pigeons,  and  peewits.  In  places  in  America  as  thickly  set 
tled  as  the  valley  of  the  Itchen,  I  should  not  expect  to  see 
any  like  number  of  birds  of  this  size;  but  I  hope  that  the 
efforts  of  the  Audubon  societies  and  kindred  organizations 
will  gradually  make  themselves  felt  until  it  becomes  a  point 
of  honor  not  only  with  the  American  man,  but  with  the 
American  small  boy,  to  shield  and  protect  all  forms  of 
harmless  wild  life.  True  sportsmen  should  take  the  lead 


324    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

In  such  a  movement,  for  if  there  is  to  be  any  shooting  there 
must  be  something  to  shoot ;  the  prime  necessity  is  to  keep, 
and  not  kill  out,  even  the  birds  which  in  legitimate  numbers 
may  be  shot. 

The  New  Forest  is  a  wild,  uninhabited  stretch  of  heath 
and  woodland,  many  of  the  trees  gnarled  and  aged,  and  its 
very  wildness,  the  lack  of  cultivation,  the  ruggedness,  made 
it  strongly  attractive  in  my  eyes,  and  suggested  my  own 
country.  The  birds  of  course  were  much  less  plentiful  thar 
beside  the  Itchen. 

The  bird  that  most  impressed  me  on  my  walk  was  the 
blackbird.  I  had  already  heard  nightingales  in  abundance 
near  Lake  Como,  and  had  also  listened  to  larks,  but  I  had 
never  heard  either  the  blackbird,  the  song  thrush,  or  the 
blackcap  warbler;  and  while  I  knew  that  all  three  were 
good  singers,  I  did  not  know  what  really  beautiful  singers 
they  were.  Blackbirds  were  very  abundant,  and  they  played 
a  prominent  part  in  the  chorus  which  we  heard  throughout 
the  day  on  every  hand,  though  perhaps  loudest  the  follow 
ing  morning  at  dawn.  In  its  habits  and  manners  the  black 
bird  strikingly  resembles  our  American  robin,  and  indeed 
looks  exactly  like  a  robin,  with  a  yellow  bill  and  coal-black 
plumage.  It  hops  everywhere  over  the  lawns,  just  as  our 
robin  does,  and  it  lives  and  nests  in  the  gardens  in  the  same 
fashion.  Its  song  has  a  general  resemblance  to  that  of  our 
robin,  but  many  of  the  notes  are  far  more  musical,  more 
like  those  of  our  wood  thrush.  Indeed,  there  were  indi 
viduals  among  those  we  heard  certain  of  whose  notes 
seemed  to  me  almost  to  equal  in  point  of  melody  the  chimes 
of  the  wood  thrush ;  and  the  highest  possible  praise  for  any 
song-bird  is  to  liken  its  song  to  that  of  the  wood  thrush  or 
hermit  thrush.  I  certainly  do  not  think  that  the  blackbird 
has  received  full  justice  in  the  books.  I  knew  that  he  was  a 
singer,  but  I  really  had  no  idea  how  fine  a  singer  he  was. 
I  suppose  one  of  his  troubles  has  been  his  name,  just  as  with 
our  own  catbird.  When  he  appears  in  the  ballads  as  the 
merle,  bracketed  with  his  cousin  the  mavis,  the  song  thrush, 
it  is  far  easier  to  recognize  him  as  the  master  singer  that 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS          325 

he  is.  It  is  a  fine  thing  for  England  to  have  such  an  asset 
of  the  countryside,  a  bird  so  common,  so  much  in  evidence, 
so  fearless,  and  such  a  really  beautiful  singer. 

The  thrush  is  a  fine  singer  too,  a  better  singer  than  our 
American  robin,  but  to  my  mind  not  at  the  best  quite  as 
good  as  the  blackbird  at  his  best;  although  often  I  found 
difficulty  in  telling  the  song  of  one  from  the  song  of  the 
other,  especially  if  I  only  heard  two  or  three  notes. 

The  larks  were,  of  course,  exceedingly  attractive.  It  was 
fascinating  to  see  them  spring  from  the  grass,  circle  up 
wards,  steadily  singing  and  soaring  for  several  minutes, 
and  then  return  to  the  point  whence  they  had  started.  As 
my  companion  pointed  out,  they  exactly  fulfilled  Words 
worth's  description;  they  soared  but  did  not  roam.  It  is 
quite  impossible  wholly  to  differentiate  a  bird's  voice  from 
its  habits  and  surroundings.  Although  in  the  lark's  song 
there  are  occasional  musical  notes,  the  song  as  a  whole  is 
not  very  musical ;  but  it  is  so  joyous,  buoyant  and  unbroken, 
and  uttered  under  such  conditions  as  fully  to  entitle  the 
bird  to  the  place  he  occupies  with  both  poet  and  prose 
writer. 

The  most  musical  singer  we  heard  was  the  blackcap 
warbler.  To  my  ear  its  song  seemed  more  musical  than 
that  of  the  nightingale.  It  was  astonishingly  powerful  for 
so  small  a  bird ;  in  volume  and  continuity  it  does  not  come 
up  to  the  songs  of  the  thrushes  and  of  certain  other  birds, 
but  in  quality,  as  an  isolated  bit  of  melody,  it  can  hardly 
be  surpassed. 

Among  the  minor  singers  the  robin  was  noticeable.  We 
all  know  this  pretty  little  bird  from  the  books,  and  I  was 
prepared  to  find  him  as  friendly  and  attractive  as  he  proved 
to  be,  but  I  had  not  realized  how  well  he  sang.  It  is  not  a 
loud  song,  but  very  musical  and  attractive,  and  the  bird  is 
said  to  sing  practically  all  through  the  year.  The  song  of 
the  wren  interested  me  much,  because  it  was  not  in  the  least 
like  that  of  our  house  wren,  but,  on  the  contrary,  like  that 
of  our  winter  wren.  The  theme  is  the  same  as  the  winter 
wren's,  but  the  song  did  not  seem  to  me  to  be  as  brilliantly 


326    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

musical  as  that  of  the  tiny  singer  of  the  North  Woods.  The 
sedge  warbler  sang  in  the  thick  reeds  a  mocking  ventrilo- 
quial  lay,  which  reminded  me  at  times  of  the  less  pro 
nounced  parts  of  our  yellow-breasted  chat's  song.  The 
cuckoo's  cry  was  singularly  attractive  and  musical,  far 
more  so  than  the  rolling,  many  times  repeated,  note  of  our 
rain-crow. 

We  did  not  reach  the  inn  at  Brockenhurst  until  about 
nine  o  'clock,  just  at  nightfall,  and  a  few  minutes  before  that 
we  heard  a  nightjar.  It  did  not  sound  in  the  least  like 
either  our  whip-poor-will  or  our  night-hawk,  uttering  a 
long-continued  call  of  one  or  two  syllables,  repeated  over 
and  over.  The  chaffinch  was  very  much  in  evidence,  con 
tinually  chaunting  its  unimportant  little  ditty.  I  was 
pleased  to  see  the  bold,  masterful  missel  thrush,  the  storm- 
cock  as  it  is  often  called ;  but  this  bird  breeds  and  sings  in 
the  early  spring,  when  the  weather  is  still  tempestuous, 
and  had  long  been  silent  when  we  saw  it.  The  starlings, 
rooks,  and  jackdaws  did  not  sing,  and  their  calls  were  at 
tractive  merely  as  the  calls  of  our  grakles  are  attractive; 
and  the  other  birds  that  we  heard  sing,  though  they  played 
their  part  in  the  general  chorus,  were  performers  of  no 
especial  note,  like  our  tree-creepers,  pine  warblers,  and 
chipping  sparrows.  The  great  spring  chorus  had  already 
begun  to  subside,  but  the  woods  and  fields  were  still  vocal 
with  beautiful  bird  music,  the  country  was  very  lovely,  the 
inn  as  comfortable  as  possible,  and  the  bath  and  supper 
very  enjoyable  after  our  tramp;  and  altogether  I  passed 
no  pleasanter  twenty-four  hours  during  my  entire  Euro 
pean  trip. 

Ten  days  later,  at  Sagamore  Hill,  I  was  among  my  own 
birds,  and  was  much  interested  as  I  listened  to  and  looked 
at  them  in  remembering  the  notes  and  actions  of  the  birds 
I  had  seen  in  England.  On  the  evening  of  the  first  day  I 
sat  in  my  rocking-chair  on  the  broad  veranda,  looking 
across  the  Sound  towards  the  glory  of  the  sunset.  The 
thickly  grassed  hillside  sloped  down  in  front  of  me  to  a  belt 
of  forest  from  which  rose  the  golden,  leisurely  chiming  of 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS         327 

the  wood  thrushes,  chanting  their  vespers ;  through  the  still 
air  came  the  warble  of  vireo  and  tanager ;  and  after  night 
fall  we  heard  the  flight  song  of  an  ovenbird  from  the  same 
belt  of  timber.  Overhead  an  oriole  sang  in  the  weeping  elm, 
now  and  then  breaking  his  song  to  scold  like  an  overgrown 
wren.  Song-sparrows  and  catbirds  sang  in  the  shrubbery; 
one  robin  had  built  its  nest  over  the  front  and  one  over  the 
back  door,  and  there  was  a  chippy's  nest  in  the  wistaria 
vine  by  the  stoop.  During  the  next  twenty-four  hours  I 
saw  and  heard,  either  right  around  the  house  or  while  walk 
ing  down  to  bathe,  through  the  woods,  the  following  forty- 
two  birds: 

Little  green  heron,  night  heron,  red-tailed  hawk,  yellow- 
billed  cuckoo,  kingfisher,  flicker,  humming-bird,  swift, 
meadow-lark,  red-winged  blackbird,  sharp-tailed  finch,  song 
sparrow,  chipping  sparrow,  bush  sparrow,  purple  finch, 
Baltimore  oriole,  cowbunting,  robin,  wood  thrush,  thrasher, 
catbird,  scarlet  tanager,  red-eyed  vireo,  yellow  warbler, 
black-throated  green  warbler,  kingbird,  wood  peewee,  crow, 
blue  jay,  cedar-bird,  Maryland  yellowthroat,  chickadee, 
black  and  white  creeper,  barn  swallow,  white  -  breasted 
swallow,  ovenbird,  thistlefinch,  vesperfinch,  indigo  bunting, 
towhee,  grasshopper-sparrow,  and  screech  owl. 

The  birds  were  still  in  full  song,  for  on  Long  Island  there 
is  little  abatement  in  the  chorus  until  about  the  second  week 
of  July,  when  the  blossoming  of  the  chestnut  trees  patches 
the  woodland  with  frothy  greenish-yellow.1 

Our  most  beautiful  singers  are  the  wood  thrushes;  they 
sing  not  only  in  the  early  morning  but  throughout  the  long 
hot  June  afternoons.  Sometimes  they  sing  in  the  trees  im 
mediately  around  the  house,  and  if  the  air  is  still  we  can 
always  hear  them  from  among  the  tall  trees  at  the  foot  of 
the  hill.  The  thrashers  sing  in  the  hedgerows  beyond  the 
garden,  the  catbirds  everywhere.  The  catbirds  have  such 
an  attractive  song  that  it  is  extremely  irritating  to  know 
that  at  any  moment  they  may  interrupt  it  to  mew  and 

i  Alas !  the  blight  has  now  destroyed  the  chestnut  trees,  and  robbed  our 
woods  of  one  of  their  distinctive  beauties. 


328    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

squeal.  The  bold,  cheery  music  of  the  robins  always  seems 
typical  of  the  bold,  cheery  birds  themselves.  The  Balti 
more  orioles  nest  in  the  young  elms  around  the  house,  and 
the  orchard  orioles  in  the  apple  trees  near  the  garden  and 
outbuildings.  Among  the  earliest  sounds  of  spring  is  the 
cheerful,  simple,  homely  song  of  the  song-sparrow;  and  in 
March  we  also  hear  the  piercing  cadence  of  the  meadow- 
lark — to  us  one  of  the  most  attractive  of  all  bird  calls.  Of 
late  years  now  and  then  we  hear  the  rollicking,  bubbling 
melody  of  the  bobolink  in  the  pastures  back  of  the  barn; 
and  when  the  full  chorus  of  these  and  of  many  other  of  the 
singers  of  spring  is  dying  down,  there  are  some  true  hot- 
weather  songsters,  such  as  the  brightly  hued  indigo  bunt 
ings  and  thistlefinches.  Among  the  finches  one  of  the  most 
musical  and  plaintive  songs  is  that  of  the  bush-sparrow — 
I  do  not  know  why  the  books  call  it  field-sparrow,  for  it 
does  not  dwell  in  the  open  fields  like  the  vesperfinch,  the 
savannah-sparrow,  and  grasshopper-sparrow,  but  among 
the  cedars  and  bayberry  bushes  and  young  locusts  in  the 
same  places  where  the  prairie  warbler  is  found.  Nor  is  it 
only  the  true  songs  that  delight  us.  We  love  to  hear  the 
flickers  call,  and  we  readily  pardon  any  one  of  their  number 
which,  as  occasionally  happens,  is  bold  enough  to  wake  us 
in  the  early  morning  by  drumming  on  the  shingles  of  the 
roof.  In  our  ears  the  red-winged  blackbirds  have  a  very 
attractive  note.  We  love  the  screaming  of  the  red-tailed 
hawks  as  they  soar  high  overhead,  and  even  the  calls  of 
the  night  heron  that  nest  in  the  tall  water  maples  by  one 
of  the  wood  ponds  on  our  place,  and  the  little  green  herons 
that  nest  beside  the  salt  marsh.  It  is  hard  to  tell  just  how 
much  of  the  attraction  in  any  bird-note  lies  in  the  music 
itself  and  how  much  in  the  associations.  This  is  what  makes 
it  so  useless  to  try  to  compare  the  bird  songs  of  one  country 
with  those  of  another.  A  man  who  is  worth  anything  can 
no  more  be  entirely  impartial  in  speaking  of  the  bird  songs 
with  which  from  his  earliest  childhood  he  has  been  familiar 
than  he  can  be  entirely  impartial  in  speaking  of  his  own 
family. 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS          329 

At  Sagamore  Hill  we  love  a  great  many  things — birds 
and  trees  and  books,  and  all  things  beautiful,  and  horses  and 
rifles  and  children  and  hard  work  and  the  joy  of  life.  We 
have  great  fireplaces,  and  in  them  the  logs  roar  and  crackle 
during  the  long  winter  evenings.  The  big  piazza  is  for  the 
hot,  still  afternoons  of  summer.  As  in  every  house,  there 
are  things  that  appeal  to  the  householder  because  of  their 
associations,  but  which  would  not  mean  much  to  others. 
Naturally,  any  man  who  has  been  President,  and  filled  other 
positions,  accumulates  such  things,  with  scant  regard  to  his 
own  personal  merits.  Perhaps  our  most  cherished  posses 
sions  are  a  Kemington  bronze,  "The  Bronco  Buster,"  given 
me  by  my  men  when  the  regiment  was  mustered  out,  and  a 
big  Tiffany  silver  vase  given  to  Mrs.  Eoosevelt  by  the  en 
listed  men  of  the  battleship  Louisiana  after  we  returned 
from  a  cruise  on  her  to  Panama.  It  was  a  real  surprise  gift, 
presented  to  her  in  the  White  House,  on  behalf  of  the  whole 
crew,  by  four  as  strapping  man-of-war 's-men  as  ever  swung 
a  turret  or  pointed  a  twelve-inch  gun.  The  enlisted  men  of 
the  army  I  already  knew  well — of  course  I  knew  well  the 
officers  of  both  army  and  navy.  But  the  enlisted  men  of 
the  navy  I  only  grew  to  know  well  when  I  was  President. 
On  the  Louisiana  Mrs.  Eoosevelt  and  I  once  dined  at  the 
chief  petty  officers'  mess,  and  on  another  battleship,  the 
Missouri  (when  I  was  in  company  with  Admiral  Evans  and 
Captain  Cowles),  and  again  on  the  Sylph  and  on  the  May 
flower,  we  also  dined  as  guests  of  the  crew.  When  we 
finished  our  trip  on  the  Louisiana  I  made  a  short  speech  to 
the  assembled  crew,  and  at  its  close  one  of  the  petty  officers, 
the  very  picture  of  what  a  man-of-war  's-man  should  look 
like,  proposed  three  cheers  for  me  in  terms  that  struck  me 
as  curiously  illustrative  of  America  at  her  best;  he  said, 
"Now  then,  men,  three  cheers  for  Theodore  Eoosevelt, 
the  typical  American  citizen ! "  That  was  the  way  in  which 
they  thought  of  the  American  President — and  a  very  good 
way,  too.  It  was  an  expression  that  would  have  come  nat 
urally  only  to  men  in  whom  the  American  principles  of 
government  and  life  were  ingrained,  just  as  they  were 


330    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ingrained  in  the  men  of  my  regiment.  I  need  scarcely  add, 
but  I  will  add  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  do  not  know, 
that  this  attitude  of  self-respecting  identification  of  inter 
est  and  purpose  is  not  only  compatible  with  but  can  only 
exist  when  there  is  fine  and  real  discipline,  as  thorough  and 
genuine  as  the  discipline  that  has  always  obtained  in  the 
most  formidable  fighting  fleets  and  armies.  The  discipline 
and  the  mutual  respect  are  complementary,  not  antago 
nistic.  During  the  Presidency  all  of  us,  but  especially  the 
children,  became  close  friends  with  many  of  the  sailor 
men.  The  four  bearers  of  the  vase  to  Mrs.  Eoosevelt  were 
promptly  hailed  as  delightful  big  brothers  by  our  two  small 
est  boys,  who  at  once  took  them  to  see  the  sights  of  Wash 
ington  in  the  landau — "the  President's  land-ho!"  as,  with 
seafaring  humor,  our  guests  immediately  styled  it.  Once, 
after  we  were  in  private  life  again,  Mrs.  Roosevelt  was  in  a 
railway  station  and  had  some  difficulty  with  her  ticket.  A 
fine-looking,  quiet  man  stepped  up  and  asked  if  he  could  be 
of  help;  he  remarked  that  he  had  been  one  of  the  May 
flower  's  crew,  and  knew  us  well ;  and  in  answer  to  a  ques 
tion  explained  that  he  had  left  the  navy  in  order  to  study 
dentistry,  and  added — a  delicious  touch — that  while  thus 
preparing  himself  to  be  a  dentist  he  was  earning  the  nec 
essary  money  to  go  on  with  his  studies  by  practicing 
the  profession  of  a  prize-fighter,  being  a  good  man  in  the 
ring. 

There  are  various  bronzes  in  the  house :  Saint-Gaudens  's 
"Puritan/'  a  token  from  my  staff  officers  when  I  was  Gov 
ernor;  Proctor's  cougar,  the  gift  of  the  Tennis  Cabinet — 
who  also  gave  us  a  beautiful  silver  bowl,  which  is  always 
lovingly  pronounced  to  rhyme  with  "owl"  because  that  was 
the  pronunciation  used  at  the  time  of  the  giving  by  the  val 
ued  friend  who  acted  as  spokesman  for  his  fellow-members, 
and  who  was  himself  the  only  non- American  member  of  the 
said  Cabinet.  There  is  a  horseman  by  Macmonnies,  and  a 
big  bronze  vase  by  Kemys,  an  adaptation  or  development 
of  the  pottery  vases  of  the  Southwestern  Indians.  Mixed 
with  all  of  these  are  gifts  from  varied  sources,  ranging 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS          331 

a  brazen  Buddha  sent  me  by  the  Dalai  Lama  and  a  wonder 
ful  psalter  from  the  Emperor  Menelik  to  a  priceless  aneient 
Samurai  sword,  coming  from  Japan  in  remembrance  of  the 
peace  of  Portsmouth,  and  a  beautifully  inlaid  miniature 
suit  of  Japanese  armor,  given  me  by  a  favorite  hero  of  mine, 
Admiral  Togo,  when  he  visited  Sagamore  Hill.  There  are 
things  from  European  friends;  a  mosaic  picture  of  Pope 
Leo  XIII  in  his  garden ;  a  huge,  very  handsome  edition  of 
the  Nibelungenlied ;  a  striking  miniature  of  John  Hampden 
from  Windsor  Castle ;  editions  of  Dante,  and  the  campaigns 
of  "Eugenio  von  Savoy"  (another  of  my  heroes,  a  dead 
hero  this  time) ;  a  Viking  cup;  the  state  sword  of  a  Uganda 
king;  the  gold  box  in  which  the  "freedom  of  the  city  of 
London"  was  given  me;  a  beautiful  head  of  Abraham  Lin 
coln  given  me  by  the  French  authorities  after  my  speech 
at  the  Sorbonne;  and  many  other  things  from  sources  as 
diverse  as  the  Sultan  of  Turkey  and  the  Dowager  Empress 
of  China.  Then  there  are  things  from  home  friends:  a 
Polar  bear  skin  from  Peary ;  a  Sioux  buffalo  robe  with,  on 
it,  painted  by  some  long-dead  Sioux  artist,  the  picture  story 
of  Custer  's  fight ;  a  bronze  portrait  plaque  of  Joel  Chandler 
Harris ;  the  candlestick  used  in  sealing  the  Treaty  of  Ports 
mouth,  sent  me  by  Captain  Cameron  Winslow ;  a  shoe  worn 
by  Dan  Patch  when  he  paced  a  mile  in  1 :59,  sent  me  by  his 
owner.  There  is  a  picture  of  a  bull  moose  by  Carl  Run- 
gius,  which  seems  to  me  as  spirited  an  animal  painting  as 
I  have  ever  seen.  In  the  north  room,  with  its  tables  and 
mantelpiece  and  desks  and  chests  made  of  woods  sent  from 
the  Philippines  by  army  friends,  or  by  other  friends  for 
other  reasons;  with  its  bison  and  wapiti  heads;  there  are 
three  paintings  by  Marcus  Symonds — "Where  Light  and 
Shadow  Meet,"  "The  Porcelain  Towers,"  and  "The  Seats 
of  the  Mighty";  he  is  dead  now,  and  he  had  scant  recog 
nition  while  he  lived,  yet  surely  he  was  a  great  imaginative 
artist,  a  wonderful  colorist,  and  a  man  with  a  vision  more 
wonderful  still.  There  is  one  of  Lungren's  pictures  of  the 
Western  plains;  and  a  picture  of  the  Grand  Canyon;  and 
one  by  a  .Scandinavian  artist  who  cpulcj  see  the  fierce  pictur- 


332    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

esqueness  of  wordaday  Pittsburgh;  and  sketches  of  the 
White  House  by  Sargent  and  by  Hopkinson  Smith. 

The  books  are  everywhere.  There  are  as  many  in  the 
north  room  and  in  the  parlor — is  drawing-room  a  more 
appropriate  name  than  parlor  ! — as  in  the  library ;  the  gun 
room  at  the  top  of  the  house,  which  incidentally  has  the 
loveliest  view  of  all,  contains  more  books  than  any  of  the 
other  rooms;  and  they  are  particularly  delightful  books  to 
browse  among,  just  because  they  have  not  much  relevance 
to  one  another,  this  being  one  of  the  reasons  why  they  are 
relegated  to  their  present  abode.  But  the  books  have  over 
flowed  into  all  the  other  rooms  too. 

I  could  not  name  any  principle  upon  which  the  books  have 
been  gathered.  Books  are  almost  as  individual  as  friends. 
There  is  no  earthly  use  in  laying  down  general  laws  about 
them.  Some  meet  the  needs  of  one  person,  and  some  of 
another;  and  each  person  should  beware  of  the  bo  old  over's 
besetting  sin,  of  what  Mr.  Edgar  Allan  Poe  calls  "the  mad 
pride  of  intellectuality,"  taking  the  shape  of  arrogant  pity 
for  the  man  who  does  not  like  the  same  kind  of  books.  Of 
course  there  are  books  which  a  man  or  woman  uses  as  in 
struments  of  a  profession — law  books,  medical  books,  cook 
ery  books,  and  the  like.  I  am  not  speaking  of  these,  for  they 
are  not  properly  "books"  at  all;  they  come  in  the  category 
of  time-tables,  telephone  directories,  and  other  useful  agen 
cies  of  civilized  life.  I  am  speaking  of  books  that  are  meant 
to  be  read.  Personally,  granted  that  these  books  are  decent 
and  healthy,  the  one  test  to  which  I  demand  that  they  all 
submit  is  that  of  being  interesting.  If  the  book  is  not  in 
teresting  to  the  reader,  then  in  all  but  an  infinitesimal  num 
ber  of  cases  it  gives  scant  benefit  to  the  reader.  Of  course 
any  reader  ought  to  cultivate  his  or  her  taste  so  that  good 
books  will  appeal  to  it,  and  that  trash  won't.  But  after 
this  point  has  once  been  reached,  the  needs  of  each  reader 
must  be  met  in  a  fashion  that  will  appeal  to  those  needs. 
Personally  the  books  by  which  I  have  profited  infinitely 
more  than  by  any  others  have  been  those  in  which  profit  was 
a  by-product  of  the  pleasure ;  that  is,  I  read  them  because 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS          333 

I  enjoyed  them,  because  I  liked  reading  them,  and  the  profit 
came  in  as  part  of  the  enjoyment. 

Of  course  each  individual  is  apt  to  have  some  special 
tastes  in  which  he  cannot  expect  that  any  but  a  few  friends 
will  share.  Now,  I  am  very  proud  of  my  big-game  library. 
I  suppose  there  must  be  many  big-game  libraries  in  Conti 
nental  Europe,  and  possibly  in  England,  more  extensive 
than  mine,  but  I  have  not  happened  to  come  across  any 
such  library  in  this  country.  Some  of  the  originals  go  back 
to  the  sixteenth  century,  and  there  are  copies  or  reproduc 
tions  of  the  two  or  three  most  famous  hunting  books  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  such  as  the  Duke  of  York's  translation  of 
Gaston  Phoebus,  and  the  queer  book  of  the  Emperor  Maxi 
milian.  It  is  only  very  occasionally  that  I  meet  any  one  who 
cares  for  any  of  these  books.  On  the  other  hand,  I  expect 
to  find  many  friends  who  will  turn  naturally  to  some  of  the 
old  or  the  new  books  of  poetry  or  romance  or  history  to 
which  we  of  the  household  habitually  turn.  Let  me  add 
that  ours  is  in  no  sense  a  collector's  library.  Each  book 
was  procured  because  some  one  of  the  family  wished  to 
read  it.  We  could  never  afford  to  take  overmuch  thought 
for  the  outsides  of  books ;  we  were  too  much  interested  in 
their  insides. 

Now  and  then  I  am  asked  as  to  "what  books  a  statesman 
should  read,"  and  my  answer  is,  poetry  and  novels — in 
cluding  short  stories  under  the  head  of  novels.  I  don't 
mean  that  he  should  read  only  novels  and  modern  poetry. 
If  he  cannot  also  enjoy  the  Hebrew  prophets  and  the  Greek 
dramatists,  he  should  be  sorry.  He  ought  to  read  inter 
esting  books  on  history  and  government,  and  books  of 
science  and  philosophy;  and  really  good  books  on  these 
subjects  are  as  enthralling  as  any  fiction  ever  written  in 
prose  or  verse.  Gibbon  and  Macaulay,  Herodotus,  Thucyd- 
ides  and  Tacitus,  the  Heimskringla,  Froissart,  Joinville  and 
Villehardouin,  Parkinan  and  Mahan,  Mommsen  and  Eanke 
— why!  there  are  scores  and  scores  of  solid  histories,  the 
best  in  the  world,  which  are  as  absorbing  as  the  best  of  all 
the  novels,  and  of  as  permanent  value.  The  same  thing  is 


334    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

true  of  Darwin  and  Huxley  and  Carlyle  and  Emerson,  and 
parts  of  Kant,  and  of  volumes  like  Sutherland's  "Growth  of 
the  Moral  Instinct,"  or  Acton's  Essays  and  Lounsbury's 
studies — here  again  I  am  not  trying  to  class  books  together, 
or  measure  one  by  another,  or  enumerate  one  in  a  thousand 
of  those  worth  reading,  but  just  to  indicate  that  any  man  or 
woman  of  some  intelligence  and  some  cultivation  can  in 
some  line  or  other  of  serious  thought,  scientific  or  historical 
or  philosophical  or  economic  or  governmental,  find  any 
number  of  books  which  are  charming  to  read,  and  which  in 
addition  give  that  for  which  his  or  her  soul  hungers.  I  do 
not  for  a  minute  mean  that  the  statesman  ought  not  to 
read  a  great  many  different  books  of  this  character,  just  as 
every  one  else  should  read  them.  But,  in  the  final  event, 
the  statesman,  and  the  publicist,  and  the  reformer,  and  the 
agitator  for  new  things,  and  the  upholder  of  what  is  good  in 
old  things,  all  need  more  than  anything  else  to  know  human 
nature,  to  know  the  needs  of  the  human  soul ;  and  they  will 
find  this  nature  and  these  needs  set  forth  as  nowhere  else 
by  the  great  imaginative  writers,  whether  of  prose  or  of 
poetry. 

The  room  for  choice  is  so  limitless  that  to  my  mind  it 
seems  absurd  to  try  to  make  catalogues  which  shall  be  sup 
posed  to  appeal  to  all  the  best  thinkers.  This  is  why  I  have 
no  sympathy  whatever  with  writing  lists  of  the  One  Hun 
dred  Best  Books,  or  the  Five-Foot  Library.  It  is  all  right 
for  a  man  to  amuse  himself  by  composing  a  list  of  a  hun 
dred  very  good  books ;  and  if  he  is  to  go  off  for  a  year  or 
so  where  he  cannot  get  many  books,  it  is  an  excellent  thing 
to  choose  a  five-foot  library  of  particular  books  which  in 
that  particular  year  and  on  that  particular  trip  he  would 
like  to  read.  But  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  hundred  books 
that  are  best  for  all  men,  or  for  the  majority  of  men,  or  for 
one  man  at  all  times ;  and  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  five- 
foot  library  which  will  satisfy  the  needs  of  even  one  particu 
lar  man  on  different  occasions  extending  over  a  number  of 
years.  Milton  is  best  for  one  mood  and  Pope  for  another. 
Because  a  man  likes  Whitman  or  Browning  or  Lowell  he 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS          335 

should  not  feel  himself  debarred  from  Tennyson  or  Kipling 
or  Korner  or  Heine  or  the  Bard  of  the  Dimbovitza.  Tol 
stoy's  novels  are  good  at  one  time  and  those  of  Sienkiewicz 
at  another ;  and  he  is  fortunate  who  can  relish  "Salammbo" 
and  "Tom  Brown"  and  the  "Two  Admirals "  and  "Quentin 
Durward"  and  "Artemus  Ward"  and  the  "Ingoldsby  Leg 
ends"  and  "Pickwick"  and  "Vanity  Fair."  Why,  there 
are  hundreds  of  books  like  these,  each  one  of  which,  if  really 
read,  really  assimilated,  by  the  person  to  whom  it  happens 
to  appeal,  will  enable  that  person  quite  unconsciously  to 
furnish  himself  with  much  ammunition  which  he  will  find 
of  use  in  the  battle  of  life. 

A  book  must  be  interesting  to  the  particular  reader  at 
that  particular  time.  But  there  are  tens  of  thousands  of 
interesting  books,  and  some  of  them  are  sealed  to  some  men 
and  some  are  sealed  to  others;  and  some  stir  the  soul  at 
some  given  point  of  a  man's  life  and  yet  convey  no  message 
at  other  times.  The  reader,  the  booklover,  must  meet  his 
own  needs  without  paying  too  much  attention  to  what  his 
neighbors  say  those  needs  should  be.  He  must  not  hypocrit 
ically  pretend  to  like  what  he  does  not  like.  Yet  at  the  same 
time  he  must  avoid  that  most  unpleasant  of  all  the  indica 
tions  of  puffed-up  vanity  which  consists  in  treating  mere 
individual,  and  perhaps  unfortunate,  idiosyncrasy  as  a  mat 
ter  of  pride.  I  happen  to  be  devoted  to  Macbeth,  whereas  I 
very  seldom  read  Hamlet  (though  I  like  parts  of  it).  Now 
I  am  humbly  and  sincerely  conscious  that  this  is  a  demerit 
in  me  and  not  in  Hamlet ;  and  yet  it  would  not  do  me  any 
good  to  pretend  that  I  like  Hamlet  as  much  as  Macbeth 
when,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  I  don't.  I  am  very  fond  of  simple 
epics  and  of  ballad  poetry,  from  the  Nibelungenlied  and  the 
Eoland  song  through  "Chevy  Chase"  and  "Patrick  Spens" 
and  "Twa  Corbies"  to  Scott's  poems  and  Longfellow's 
*  '  Saga  of  King  Olaf  "  and  "  Othere. '  >  On  the  other  hand,  I 
don't  care  to  read  dramas  as  a  rule ;  I  cannot  read  them  with 
enjoyment  unless  they  appeal  to  me  very  strongly.  They 
must  almost  be  uEschylus  or  Euripides,  Goethe  or  Moliere, 
in  order  that  I  may  not  feel  after  finishing  them  a  sense  of 


336    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

virtuous  pride  in  having  achieved  a  task.  Now  I  would  be 
the  first  to  deny  that  even  the  most  delightful  old  English 
ballad  should  be  put  on  a  par  with  any  one  of  scores  of  dra 
matic  works  by  authors  whom  I  have  not  mentioned ;  I  know 
that  each  of  these  dramatists  has  written  what  is  of  more 
worth  than  the  ballad;  only,  I  enjoy  the  ballad,  and  I  don't 
enjoy  the  drama ;  and  therefore  the  ballad  is  better  for  me, 
and  this  fact  is  not  altered  by  the  other  fact  that  my  own 
shortcomings  are  to  blame  in  the  matter.  I  still  read  a 
number  of  Scott's  novels  over  and  over  again,  whereas  if  I 
finish  anything  by  Miss  Austen  I  have  a  feeling  that  duty 
performed  is  a  rainbow  to  the  soul.  But  other  booklovers 
who  are  very  close  kin  to  me,  and  whose  taste  I  know  to  be 
better  than  mine,  read  Miss  Austen  all  the  time — and,  more 
over,  they  are  very  kind,  and  never  pity  me  in  too  offensive 
a  manner  for  not  reading  her  myself. 

Aside  from  the  masters  of  literature,  there  are  all  kinds  of 
books  which  one  person  will  find  delightful,  and  which  he 
certainly  ought  not  to  surrender  just  because  nobody  else 
is  able  to  find  as  much  in  the  beloved  volume.  There  is  on 
our  book-shelves  a  little  pre- Victorian  novel  or  tale  called 
*  *  The  Semi- Attached  Couple. "  It  is  told  with  much  humor ; 
it  is  a  story  of  gentlefolk  who  are  really  gentlefolk ;  and  to 
me  it  is  altogether  delightful.  But  outside  the  members  of 
my  own  family  I  have  never  met  a  human  being  who  had 
even  heard  of  it,  and  I  don't  suppose  I  ever  shall  meet  one. 
I  often  enjoy  a  story  by  some  living  author  so  much  that  I 
write  to  tell  him  so — or  to  tell  her  so;  and  at  least  half  the 
time  I  regret  my  action,  because  it  encourages  the  writer  to 
believe  that  the  public  shares  my  views,  and  he  then  finds 
that  the  public  doesn't. 

Books  are  all  very  well  in  their  way,  and  we  love  them  at 
Sagamore  Hill ;  but  children  are  better  than  books.  Saga 
more  Hill  is  one  of  three  neighboring  houses  in  which  small 
cousins  spent  very  happy  years  of  childhood.  In  the  three 
houses  there  were  at  one  time  sixteen  of  these  small  cousins, 
all  told,  and  once  we  ranged  them  in  order  of  size  and  took 
their  photograph.  There  are  many  kinds  of  success  in  life 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS          337 

worth  having.  It  is  exceedingly  interesting  and  attractive 
to  be  a  successful  business  man,  or  railroad  man,  or  farmer, 
or  a  successful  lawyer  or  doctor ;  or  a  writer,  or  a  President, 
or  a  ranchman,  or  the  colonel  of  a  fighting  regiment,  or  to 
kill  grizzly  bears  and  lions.  But  for  unflagging  interest  and 
enjoyment,  a  household  of  children,  if  things  go  reasonably 
well,  certainly  makes  all  other  forms  of  success  and  achieve 
ment  lose  their  importance  by  comparison.  It  may  be  true 
that  he  travels  farthest  who  travels  alone ;  but  the  goal  thus 
reached  is  not  worth  reaching.  And  as  for  a  life  deliber 
ately  devoted  to  pleasure  as  an  end — why,  the  greatest  hap 
piness  is  the  happiness  that  comes  as  a  by-product  of  striv 
ing  to  do  what  must  be  done,  even  though  sorrow  is  met  in 
the  doing.  There  is  a  bit  of  homely  philosophy,  quoted  by 
Squire  Bill  Widener,  of  Widener's  Valley,  Virginia,  which 
sums  up  one's  duty  in  life:  "Do  what  you  can,  with  what 
you  Ve  got,  where  you  are. ' ' 

The  country  is  the  place  for  children,  and  if  not  the 
country,  a  city  small  enough  so  that  one  can  get  out  into  the 
country.  When  our  own  children  were  little,  we  were  for 
several  winters  in  "Washington,  and  each  Sunday  afternoon 
the  whole  family  spent  in  Eock  Creek  Park,  which  was  then 
very  real  country  indeed.  I  would  drag  one  of  the  chil 
dren's  wagons;  and  when  the  very  smallest  pairs  of  feet 
grew  tired  of  trudging  bravely  after  us,  or  of  racing  on  rapt 
urous  side  trips  after  flowers  and  other  treasures,  the  own 
ers  would  clamber  into  the  wagon.  One  of  these  wagons,  by 
the  way,  a  gorgeous  red  one,  had  "Express"  painted  on  it  in 
gilt  letters,  and  was  known  to  the  younger  children  as  the 
"  'spress"  wagon.  They  evidently  associated  the  color 
with  the  term.  Once  while  we  were  at  Sagamore  something 
happened  to  the  cherished  "  'spress"  wagon  to  the  distress 
of  the  children,  and  especially  of  the  child  who  owned  it. 
Their  mother  and  I  were  just  starting  for  a  drive  in  the 
buggy,  and  we  promised  the  bereaved  owner  that  we  would 
visit  a  store  we  knew  in  East  Norwich,  a  village  a  few  miles 
away,  and  bring  back  another  "  'spress"  wagon.  When 
we  reached  the  store,  we  found  to  our  dismay  that  the  wagon 


338    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY      , 

which  we  had  seen  had  been  sold.  We  could  not  bear  to  re 
turn  without  the  promised  gift,  for  we  knew  that  the  brains 
of  small  persons  are  much  puzzled  when  their  elders  seem 
to  break  promises.  Fortunately,  we  saw  in  the  store  a  de 
lightful  little  bright-red  chair  and  bright-red  table,  and 
these  we  brought  home  and  handed  solemnly  over  to  the 
expectant  recipient,  explaining  that  as  there  unfortunately 
was  not  a  "  'spress"  wagon  we  had  brought  him  back  a 
"  'spress"  chair  and  "  'spress"  table.  It  worked  beauti 
fully!  The  "  'spress"  chair  and  table  were  received  with 
such  rapture  that  we  had  to  get  duplicates  for  the  other 
small  member  of  the  family  who  was  the  particular  crony 
of  the  proprietor  of  the  new  treasures. 

When  their  mother  and  I  returned  from  a  row,  we  would 
often  see  the  children  waiting  for  us,  running  like  sand- 
spiders  along  the  beach.  They  always  liked  to  swim  in 
company  with  a  grown-up  of  buoyant  temperament  and  in 
ventive  mind,  and  the  float  offered  limitless  opportunities 
for  enjoyment  while  bathing.  All  dutiful  parents  know  the 
game  of  "  stage-coach  ";  each  child  is  given  a  name,  such  as 
the  whip,  the  nigh  leader,  the  off  wheeler,  the  old  lady  pas 
senger,  and,  under  penalty  of  paying  a  forfeit,  must  get  up 
and  turn  round  when  the  grown-up,  who  is*  improvising  a 
thrilling  story,  mentions  that  particular  object;  and  when 
the  word  '  '  stage-coach ' '  is  mentioned,  everybody  has  to  get 
up  and  turn  round.  Well,  we  used  to  play  stage-coach  on 
the  float  while  in  swimming,  and  instead  of  tamely  getting 
up  and  turning  round,  the  child  whose  turn  it  was  had  to 
plunge  overboard.  When  I  mentioned  "stage-coach,"  the 
water  fairly  foamed  with  vigorously  kicking  little  legs ;  and 
then  there  was  always  a  moment  of  interest  while  I  counted, 
so  as  to  be  sure  that  the  number  of  heads  that  came  up 
corresponded  with  the  number  of  children  who  had  gone 
down. 

No  man  or  woman  will  ever  forget  the  time  when  some 
child  lies  sick  of  a  disease  that  threatens  its  life.  Moreover, 
much  less  serious  sickness  is  unpleasant  enough  at  the  time. 
Looking  back,  however,  there  are  elements  of  comedy  in 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS         339 

certain  of  the  less  serious  cases.  I  well  remember  one  such 
instance  which  occurred  when  we  were  living  in  Washington, 
in  a  small  house,  with  barely  enough  room  for  everybody 
when  all  the  chinks  were  filled.  Measles  descended  on  the 
household.  In  the  effort  to  keep  the  children  that  were  well 
and  those  that  were  sick  apart,  their  mother  and  I  had  to 
camp  out  in  improvised  fashion.  When  the  eldest  small  boy 
was  getting  well,  and  had  recovered  his  spirits,  I  slept  on 
a  sofa  beside  his  bed — the  sofa  being  so  short  that  my  feet 
projected  over  anyhow.  One  afternoon  the  small  boy  was 
given  a  toy  organ  by  a  sympathetic  friend.  Next  morning 
early  I  was  waked  to  find  the  small  boy  very  vivacious  and 
requesting  a  story.  Having  drowsily  told  the  story,  I  said, 
"Now,  father's  told  you  a  story,  so  you  amuse  yourself  and 
let  father  go  to  sleep ";  to  which  the  small  boy  responded 
most  virtuously,  "Yes,  father  will  go  to  sleep  and  I'll  play 
the  organ,"  which  he  did,  at  a  distance  of  two  feet  from  my 
head.  Later  his  sister,  who  had  just  come  down  with  the 
measles,  was  put  into  the  same  room.  The  small  boy  was 
convalescing,  and  was  engaged  in  playing  on  the  floor  with 
some  tin  ships,  together  with  two  or  three  pasteboard  moni 
tors  and  rams  of  my  own  manufacture.  He  was  giving  a 
vivid  rendering  of  Farragut  at  Mobile  Bay,  from  memories 
of  how  I  had  told  the  story.  My  pasteboard  rams  and  moni 
tors  were  fascinating — if  a  naval  architect  may  be  allowed 
to  praise  his  own  work — and  as  property  they  were  equally 
divided  between  the  little  girl  and  the  small  boy.  The  little 
girl  looked  on  with  alert  suspicion  from  the  bed,  for  she  was 
not  yet  convalescent  enough  to  be  allowed  down  on  the  floor. 
The  small  boy  was  busily  reciting  the  phases  of  the  fight, 
which  now  approached  its  climax,  and  the  little  girl  evi 
dently  suspected  that  her  monitor  was  destined  to  play  the 
part  of  victim. 

Little   loy.    "And   then   they   steamed  bang  into   the 
monitor." 

Little  girl.    "Brother,  don't  you  sink  my  monitor !" 
Little  boy  (without  heeding,  and  hurrying  toward  the 
climax).    "And  the  torpedo  went  at  the  monitor ! " 


340    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Little  girl.    "My  monitor  is  not  to  sink!" 

Little  boy,  dramatically:  "And  bang  the  monitor  sank!" 

Little  girl.  "It  didn't  do  any  such  thing.  My  monitor 
always  goes  to  bed  at  seven,  and  it's  now  quarter  past.  My 
monitor  was  in  bed  and  couldn't  sink ! ' ' 

When  I  was  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  Leonard 
Wood  and  I  used  often  to  combine  forces  and  take  both 
families  of  children  out  to  walk,  and  occasionally  some  of 
their  playmates.  Leonard  Wood's  son,  I  found,  attributed 
the  paternity  of  all  of  those  not  of  his  own  family  to  me. 
Once  we  were  taking  the  children  across  Eock  Creek  on  a 
fallen  tree.  I  was  standing  on  the  middle  of  the  log  trying 
to  prevent  any  of  the  children  from  falling  off,  and  while 
making  a  clutch  at  one  peculiarly  active  and  heedless  child 
I  fell  off  myself.  As  I  emerged  from  the  water  I  heard  the 
little  Wood  boy  calling  frantically  to  the  General:  "Oh! 
oh!  The  father  of  all  the  children  fell  into  the  creek!" — 
which  made  me  feel  like  an  uncommonly  moist  patriarch. 
Of  course  the  children  took  much  interest  in  the  trophies 
I  occasionally  brought  back  from  my  hunts.  When  I  started 
for  my  regiment,  in  '98,  the  stress  of  leaving  home,  which 
was  naturally  not  pleasant,  was  somewhat  lightened  by  the 
next  to  the  youngest  boy,  whose  ideas  of  what  was  about  to 
happen  were  hazy,  clasping  me  round  the  legs  with  a  beam 
ing  smile  and  saying,  "And  is  my  father  going  to  the  war? 
And  will  he  bring  me  back  a  bear  f ' '  When,  some  five  months 
later,  I  returned,  of  course  in  my  uniform,  this  little  boy  was 
much  puzzled  as  to  my  identity,  although  he  greeted  me 
affably  with  "Good  afternoon,  Colonel. "  Half  an  hour  later 
somebody  asked  him,  "Where's  father?"  to  which  he  re 
sponded,  "I  don't  know;  but  the  Colonel  is  taking  a  bath." 

Of  course  the  children  anthropomorphized — if  that  is  the 
proper  term — their  friends  of  the  animal  world.  Among 
these  friends  at  one  period  was  the  baker's  horse,  and  on  a 
very  rainy  day  I  heard  the  little  girl,  who  was  looking  out 
of  the  window,  say,  with  a  melancholy  shake  of  her  head, 
" Oh!  there  poor  Kraft's  horse,  all  soppin'  wet!" 

While  I  was  in  the  White  House  the  youngest  boy  became 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS          341 

an  liabitue  of  a  small  and  rather  noisome  animal  shop,  and 
the  good-natured  owner  would  occasionally  let  him  take  pets 
home  to  play  with.  On  one  occasion  I  was  holding  a  conver 
sation  with  one  of  the  leaders  in  Congress,  Uncle  Pete 
Hepburn,  about  the  Railroad  Kate  Bill.  The  children  were 
strictly  trained  not  to  interrupt  business,  but  on  this  par 
ticular  occasion  the  little  boy's  feelings  overcame  him.  He 
had  been  loaned  a  king-snake,  which,  as  all  nature-lovers 
know,  is  not  only  a  useful  but  a  beautiful  snake,  very 
friendly  to  human  beings;  and  he  came  rushing  home  to 
show  the  treasure.  He  was  holding  it  inside  his  coat,  and  it 
contrived  to  wiggle  partly  down  the  sleeve.  Uncle  Pete 
Hepburn  naturally  did  not  understand  the  full  import  of 
what  the  little  boy  was  saying  to  me  as  he  endeavored  to 
wriggle  out  of  his  jacket,  and  kindly  started  to  help  him — 
and  then  jumped  back  with  alacrity  as  the  small  boy  and  the 
snake  both  popped  out  of  the  jacket. 

There  could  be  no  healthier  and  pleasanter  place  in  which 
to  bring  up  children  than  in  that  nook  of  old-time  America 
around  Sagamore  Hill.  Certainly  I  never  knew  small  peo 
ple  to  have  a  better  time  or  a  better  training  for  their  work 
in  after  life  than  the  three  families  of  cousins  at  Sagamore 
Hill.  It  was  real  country,  and — speaking  from  the  some 
what  detached  point  of  view  of  the  masculine  parent — I 
should  say  there  was  just  the  proper  mixture  of  freedom 
and  control  in  the  management  of  the  children.  They  were 
never  allowed  to  be  disobedient  or  to  shirk  lessons  or  work ; 
and  they  were  encouraged  to  have  all  the  fun  possible. 
They  often  went  barefoot,  especially  during  the  many  hours 
passed  in  various  enthralling  pursuits  along  and  in  the 
waters  of  the  bay.  They  swam,  they  tramped,  they  boated, 
they  coasted  and  skated  in  winter,  they  were  intimate 
friends  with  the  cows,  chickens,  pigs,  and  other  live  stock. 
They  had  in  succession  two  ponies,  General  Grant  and,  when 
the  General's  legs  became  such  that  he  lay  down  too  often 
and  too  unexpectedly  in  the  road,  a  calico  pony  named  Al 
gonquin,  wrho  is  still  living  a  life  of  honorable  leisure  in  the 
stable  and  in  the  pasture — where  he  has  to  be  picketed, 


342    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

because  otherwise  lie  chases  the  cows.  Sedate  pony  Grant 
used  to  draw  the  cart  in  which  the  children  went  driving 
when  they  were  very  small,  the  driver  being  their  old  nurse 
Mame,  who  had  held  their  mother  in  her  arms  when  she 
was  born,  and  who  was  knit  to  them  by  a  tie  as  close  as  any 
tie  of  blood.  I  doubt  whether  I  ever  saw  Mame  really  of 
fended  with  them  except  once  when,  out  of  pure  but  mis 
understood  affection,  they  named  a  pig  after  her.  They 
loved  pony  Grant.  Once  I  saw  the  then  little  boy  of  three 
hugging  pony  Grant's  fore  legs.  As  he  leaned  over,  his 
broad  straw  hat  tilted  on  end,  and  pony  Grant  meditatively 
munched  the  brim ;  whereupon  the  small  boy  looked  up  with 
a  wail  of  anguish,  evidently  thinking  the  pony  had  decided 
to  treat  him  like  a  radish. 

The  children  had  pets  of  their  own,  too,  of  course.  Among 
them  guinea  pigs  were  the  stand-bys — their  highly  unemo 
tional  nature  fits  them  for  companionship  with  adoring  but 
over-enthusiastic  young  masters  and  mistresses.  Then 
there  were  flying  squirrels,  and  kangaroo  rats,  gentle  and 
trustful,  and  a  badger  whose  temper  was  short  but  whose 
nature  was  fundamentally  friendly.  The  badger  's  name  was 
Josiah ;  the  particular  little  boy  whose  property  he  was  used 
to  carry  him  about,  clasped  firmly  around  what  would  have 
been  his  waist  if  he  had  had  any.  Inasmuch  as  when  on  the 
ground  the  badger  would  play  energetic  games  of  tag  with 
the  little  boy  and  nip  his  bare  legs,  I  suggested  that  it  would 
be  uncommonly  disagreeable  if  he  took  advantage  of  being 
held  in  the  little  boy's  arms  to  bite  his  face;  but  this  sug 
gestion  was  repelled  with  scorn  as  an  unworthy  assault  on 
the  character  of  Josiah.  "He  bites  legs  sometimes,  but  he 
never  bites  faces/'  said  the  little  boy.  We  also  had  a  young 
black  bear  whom  the  children  christened  Jonathan  Edwards, 
paxtly  out  of  compliment  to  their  mother,  who  was  de 
scended  from  that  great  Puritan  divine,  and  partly  because 
the  bear  possessed  a  temper  in  which  gloom  and  strength 
were  combined  in  what  the  children  regarded  as  Calvinistic 
proportions.  As  for  the  dogs,  of  course  there  were  many, 
and  during  their  lives  they  were  intimate  and  valued  family 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS         343 

friends,  and  their  deaths  were  household  tragedies.  One 
of  them,  a  large  yellow  animal  of  several  good  breeds  and 
valuable  rather  because  of  psychical  than  physical  traits, 
was  named  "Susan"  by  his  small  owners,  in  commemora 
tion  of  another  retainer,  a  white  cow ;  the  fact  that  the  cow 
and  the  dog  were  not  of  the  same  sex  being  treated  with  in 
difference.  Much  the  most  individual  of  the  dogs  and  the 
one  with  the  strongest  character  was  Sailor  Boy,  a  Chesa 
peake  Bay  dog.  He  had  a  masterful  temper  and  a  strong 
sense  of  both  dignity  and  duty.  He  would  never  let  the  other 
dogs  fight,  and  he  himself  never  fought  unless  circumstances 
imperatively  demanded  it ;  but  he  was  a  murderous  animal 
when  he  did  fight.  He  was  not  only  exceedingly  fond  of  the 
water,  as  was  to  be  expected,  but  passionately  devoted  to 
gunpowder  in  every  form,  for  he  loved  firearms  and  fairly 
reveled  in  the  Fourth  of  July  celebrations — the  latter  being 
rather  hazardous  occasions,  as  the  children  strongly  ob 
jected  to  any  "safe  and  sane"  element  being  injected  into 
them,  and  had  the  normal  number  of  close  shaves  with 
rockets,  Roman  candles,  and  firecrackers. 

One  of  the  stand-bys  for  enjoyment,  especially  in  rainy 
weather,  was  the  old  barn.  This  had  been  built  nearly  a 
century  previously,  and  was  as  delightful  as  only  the  pleas- 
antest  kind  of  old  barn  can  be.  It  stood  at  the  meeting- 
spot  of  three  fences.  A  favorite  amusement  used  to  be  an 
obstacle  race  when  the  barn  was  full  of  hay.  The  con 
testants  were  timed  and  were  started  successively  from  out 
side  the  door.  They  rushed  inside,  clambered  over  or  bur 
rowed  through  the  hay,  as  suited  them  best,  dropped  out  of 
a  place  where  a  loose  board  had  come  off,  got  over,  through, 
or  under  the  three  fences,  and  raced  back  to  the  starting- 
point.  When  they  were  little,  their  respective  fathers  were 
expected  also  to  take  part  in  the  obstacle  race,  and  when 
with  the  advance  of  years  the  fathers  finally  refused  to  be 
contestants,  there  was  a  general  feeling  of  pained  regret 
among  the  children  at  such  a  decline  in  the  sporting  spirit. 

Another  famous  place  for  handicap  races  was  Cooper's 
Bluff,  a  gigantic  sand-bank  rising  from  the  edge  of  the  bay, 


344    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

a  mile  from  the  house.  If  the  tide  was  high  there  was  an 
added  thrill,  for  some  of  the  contestants  were  sure  to  run 
into  the  water. 

As  soon  as  the  little  boys  learned  to  swim  they  were  al 
lowed  to  go  off  by  themselves  in  rowboats  and  camp  out  for 
the  night  along  the  Sound.  Sometimes  I  would  go  along  so 
as  to  take  the  smaller  children.  Once  a  schooner  was 
wrecked  on  a  point  half  a  dozen  miles  away.  She  held 
together  well  for  a  season  or  two  after  having  been  cleared 
of  everything  down  to  the  timbers,  and  this  gave  us  the 
chance  to  make  camping-out  trips  in  which  the  girls  could 
also  be  included,  for  we  put  them  to  sleep  in  the  wreck, 
while  the  boys  slept  on  the  shore;  squaw  picnics,  the  chil 
dren  called  them. 

My  children,  when  young,  went  to  the  public  school  near 
us,  the  little  Cove  School,  as  it  is  called.  For  nearly  thirty 
years  we  have  given  the  Christmas  tree  to  the  school.  Be 
fore  the  gifts  are  distributed  I  am  expected  to  make  an 
address,  which  is  always  mercifully  short,  my  own  children 
having  impressed  upon  me  with  frank  sincerity  the  attitude 
of  other  children  to  addresses  of  this  kind  on  such  occasions. 
There  are  of  course  performances  by  the  children  them 
selves,  while  all  of  us  parents  look  admiringly  on,  each 
sympathizing  with  his  or  her  particular  offspring  in  the 
somewhat  wooden  recital  of  "  Darius  Green  and  his  Fly 
ing  Machine"  or  "The  Mountain  and  the  Squirrel  had  a 
Quarrel."  But  the  tree  and  the  gifts  make  up  for  all  short 
comings. 

We  had  a  sleigh  for  winter ;  but  if,  when  there  was  much 
snow,  the  whole  family  desired  to  go  somewhere,  we  would 
put  the  body  of  the  farm  wagon  on  runners  and  all  bundle 
in  together.  We  always  liked  snow  at  Christmas  time,  and 
the  sleigh-ride  down  to  the  church  on  Christmas  eve.  One 
of  the  hymns  always  sung  at  this  Christmas  eve  festival  be 
gins,  "It's  Christmas  eve  on  the  river ;  it's  Christmas  eve  on 
the  bay. "  All  good  natives  of  the  village  firmly  believe  that 
this  hymn  was  written  here,  and  with  direct  reference  to 
Oyster  Bay;  although  if  such  were  the  case  the  word 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS         345 

"river"  would  have  to  be  taken  in  a  hyperbolic  sense,  as 
the  nearest  approach  to  a  river  is  the  village  pond.  I  used 
to  share  this  belief  myself,  until  my  faith  was  shaken  by  a 
Denver  lady  who  wrote  that  she  had  sung  that  hymn  when 
a  child  in  Michigan,  and  that  at  the  present  time  her  little 
Denver  babies  also  loved  it,  although  in  their  case  the  river 
was  not  represented  by  even  a  village  pond. 

When  we  were  in  Washington,  the  children  usually  went 
with  their  mother  to  the  Episcopal  church,  while  I  went  to 
the  Dutch  Keformed.  But  if  any  child  misbehaved  itself, 
it  was  sometimes  sent  next  Sunday  to  church  with  me,  on 
the  theory  that  my  companionship  would  have  a  sedative 
effect — which  it  did,  as  I  and  the  child  walked  along  with 
rather  constrained  politeness,  each  eying  the  other  with 
watchful  readiness  for  the  unexpected.  On  one  occasion, 
when  the  child's  conduct  fell  just  short  of  warranting  such 
extreme  measures,  his  mother,  as  they  were  on  the  point 
of  entering  church,  concluded  a  homily  by  a  quotation  which 
showed  a  certain  haziness  of  memory  concerning  the  mar 
riage  and  baptismal  services :  '  *  No,  little  boy,  if  this  con 
duct  continues,  I  shall  think  that  you  neither  love,  honor, 
nor  obey  me!"  However,  the  culprit  was  much  impressed 
with  a  sense  of  shortcoming  as  to  the  obligations  he  had 
undertaken;  so  the  result  was  as  satisfactory  as  if  the 
quotation  had  been  from  the  right  service. 

As  for  the  education  of  the  children,  there  was  of  course 
much  of  it  that  represented  downright  hard  work  and  drudg 
ery.  There  was  also  much  training  that  came  as  a  by-prod 
uct  and  was  perhaps  almost  as  valuable — not  as  a  sub 
stitute  but  as  an  addition.  After  their  supper,  the  children, 
wThen  little,  would  come  trotting  up  to  their  mother's  room 
to  be  read  to,  and  it  Avas  always  a  surprise  to  me  to  notice 
the  extremely  varied  reading  which  interested  them,  from 
Howard  Pyle's  " Robin  Hood,"  Mary  Alicia  Owen's  " Voo 
doo  Tales,"  and  Joel  Chandler  Harris's  "  Aaron  in  the  Wild 
Woods,"  to  "Lycides"  and  "King  John."  If  their  mother 
was  absent  I  would  try  to  act  as  vice-mother — a  poor  sub 
stitute,  1  fear — superintending  the  supper  and  reading 


346    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

aloud  afterwards.  The  children  did  not  wish  me  to  read 
the  books  they  desired  their  mother  to  read,  and  I  usually 
took  some  such  book  as  "Hereward  the  Wake,"  or  "Guy 
Mannering,"  or  "The  Last  of  the  Mohicans"  or  else  some 
story  about  a  man-eating  tiger,  or  a  man-eating  lion,  from 
one  of  the  hunting  books  in  my  library.  These  latter  stories 
were  always  favorites,  and  as  the  authors  told  them  in  the 
first  person,  my  interested  auditors  grew  to  know  them  by 
the  name  of  the  "I"  stories,  and  regarded  them  as  adven 
tures  all  of  which  happened  to  the  same  individual.  When 
Selous,  the  African  hunter,  visited  us,  I  had  to  get  him  to 
tell  to  the  younger  children  two  or  three  of  the  stories  with 
which  they  were  already  familiar  from  my  reading;  and 
as  Selous  is  a  most  graphic  narrator,  and  always  enters 
thoroughly  into  the  feeling  not  only  of  himself  but  of  the 
opposing  lion  or  buffalo,  my  own  rendering  of  the  inci 
dents  was  cast  entirely  in  to  the  shade. 

Besides  profiting  by  the  more  canonical  books  on  educa 
tion,  we  profited  by  certain  essays  and  articles  of  a  less 
orthodox  type.  I  wish  to  express  my  warmest  gratitude  for 
such  books — not  of  avowedly  didactic  purpose — as  Laura 
Kichards's  books,  Josephine  Dodge  Daskam's  "Madness 
of  Philip,"  Palmer  Cox's  "Queer  People,"  the  melodies  of 
Father  Goose  and  Mother  Wild  Goose,  Flandreau's  "Mrs. 
White's/'  Myra  Kelly's  stories  of  her  little  East  Side  pu 
pils,  and  Michelson  's  * '  Madigans. "  It  is  well  to  take  duties, 
and  life  generally,  seriously.  It  is  also  well  to  remember 
that  a  sense  of  humor  is  a  healthy  anti-scorbutic  to  that 
portentous  seriousness  which  defeats  its  own  purpose. 

Occasionally  bits  of  self-education  proved  of  unexpected 
help  to  the  children  in  later  years.  Like  other  children,  they 
were  apt  to  take  to  bed  with  them  treasures  which  they  par 
ticularly  esteemed.  One  of  the  boys,  just  before  his  six 
teenth  birthday,  went  moose  hunting  with  the  family  doctor, 
and  close  personal  friend  of  the  entire  family,  Alexander 
Lambert.  Once  night  overtook  them  before  they  camped, 
and  they  had  to  lie  down  just  where  they  were.  Next  morn 
ing  Dr.  Lambert  rather  enviously  congratulated  the  boy  on 


OUTDOORS  AND  INDOORS          347 

the  fact  that  stones  and  roots  evidently  did  not  interfere 
with  the  soundness  of  his  sleep ;  to  which  the  boy  responded, 
"Well,  Doctor,  you  see  it  isn't  very  long  since  I  used 
to  take  fourteen  china  animals  to  bed  with  me  every 
night!" 

As  the  children  grew  up,  Sagamore  Hill  remained  delight 
ful  for  them.  There  were  picnics  and  riding  parties,  there 
were  dances  in  the  north  room — sometimes  fancy  dress 
dances — and  open-air  plays  on  the  green  tennis  court  of  one 
of  the  cousin's  houses.  The  children  are  no  longer  children 
now.  Most  of  them  are  men  and  women,  working  out  their 
own  fates  in  the  big  world;  some  in  our  own  land,  others 
across  the  great  oceans  or  where  the  Southern  Cross  blazes 
in  the  tropic  nights.  Some  of  them  have  children  of  their 
own;  some  are  working  at  one  thing,  some  at  another;  in 
cable  ships,  in  business  offices,  in  factories,  in  newspaper 
offices,  building  steel  bridges,  bossing  gravel  trains  and 
steam  shovels,  or  laying  tracks  and  superintending  freight 
traffic.  They  have  had  their  share  of  accidents  and  escapes ; 
as  I  write,  word  comes  from  a  far-off  land  that  one  of  them, 
whom  Seth  Bullock  used  to  call  "Kim"  because  he  was  the 
friend  of  all  mankind,  while  bossing  a  dangerous  but  neces 
sary  steel  structural  job  has  had  two  ribs  and  two  back 
teeth  broken,  and  is  back  at  work.  They  have  known  and 
they  will  know  joy  and  sorrow,  triumph  and  temporary  de 
feat.  But  I  believe  they  are  all  the  better  off  because  of 
their  happy  and  healthy  childhood. 

It  is  impossible  to  win  the  great  prizes  of  life  without 
running  risks,  and  the  greatest  of  all  prizes  are  those  con 
nected  with  the  home.  No  father  and  mother  can  hope  to 
escape  sorrow  and  anxiety,  and  there  are  dreadful  moments 
when  death  comes  very  near  those  we  love,  even  if  for  the 
time  being  it  passes  by.  But  life  is  a  great  adventure,  and 
the  worst  of  all  fears  is  the  fear  of  living.  There  are  many 
forms  of  success,  many  forms  of  triumph.  But  there  is  no 
other  success  that  in  any  shape  or  way  approaches  that 
which  is  open  to  most  of  the  many,  many  men  and  women 
who  have  the  right  ideals.  These  are  the  men  and  women 


348    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

who  see  that  it  is  the  intimate  and  homely  things  that  count 
most.  They  are  the  men  and  women  who  have  the  courage 
to  strive  for  the  happiness  which  comes  only  with  labor  and 
effort  and  self-sacrifice,  and  only  to  those  whose  joy  in  life 
springs  in  part  from  power  of  work  and  sense  of  duty. 


CHAPTER   X 

THE  PRESIDENCY;  MAKING  AN  OLD  PARTY  PROGRESSIVE 

ON  September  6,  1901,  President  McKinley  was  shot  by  an 
Anarchist  in  the  city  of  Buffalo.  I  went  to  Buffalo  at  once. 
The  President's  condition  seemed  to  be  improving,  and 
after  a  day  or  two  we  were  told  that  he  was  practically  out 
of  danger.  I  then  joined  my  family,  who  were  in  the  Adi- 
rondacks,  near  the  foot  of  Mount  Tahawus.  A  day  or  two 
afterwards  we  took  a  long  tramp  through  the  forest,  and  in 
the  afternoon  I  climbed  Mount  Tahawus.  After  reaching 
the  top  I  had  descended  a  few  hundred  feet  to  a  shelf  of 
land  where  there  was  a  little  lake,  when  I  saw  a  guide  com 
ing  out  of  the  woods  on  our  trail  from  below.  I  felt  at  once 
that  he  had  bad  news  and,  sure  enough,  he  handed  me  a  tele 
gram  saying  that  the  President's  condition  was  much  worse 
and  that  I  must  come  to  Buffalo  immediately.  It  was  late 
in  the  afternoon,  and  darkness  had  fallen  by  the  time  I 
reached  the  clubhouse  where  we  were  staying.  It  was  some 
time  afterwards  before  I  could  get  a  wagon  to  drive  me  out 
to  the  nearest  railway  station,  North  Creek,  some  forty  or 
fifty  miles  distant.  The  roads  were  the  ordinary  wilderness 
roads  and  the  night  was  dark.  But  we  changed  horses  two 
or  three  times — when  I  say  "we"  I  mean  the  driver  and  I, 
as  there  was  no  one  else  with  us — and  reached  the  station 
just  at  dawn,  to  learn  from  Mr.  Loeb,  who  had  a  special 
train  waiting,  that  the  President  was  dead.  That  evening 
I  took  the  oath  of  office,  in  the  house  of  Ansley  Wilcox,  at 
Buffalo. 

On  three  previous  occasions  the  Vice-President  had  suc 
ceeded  to  the  Presidency  on  the  death  of  the  President.  In 
each  case  there  had  been  a  reversal  of  party  policy,  and  a 

349 


350    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

nearly  immediate  and  nearly  complete  change  in  the  person 
nel  of  the  higher  offices,  especially  the  Cabinet.  I  had  never 
felt  that  this  was  wise  from  any  standpoint.  If  a  man  is  fit 
to  be  President,  he  will  speedily  so  impress  himself  in  the 
office  that  the  policies  pursued  will  be  his  anyhow,  and  he 
will  not  have  to  bother  as  to  whether  he  is  changing  them  or 
not;  while  as  regards  the  offices  under  him,  the  important 
thing  for  him  is  that  his  subordinates  shall  make  a  success 
in  handling  their  several  departments.  The  subordinate  is 
sure  to  desire  to  make  a  success  of  his  department  for  his 
own  sake,  and  if  he  is  a  fit  man,  whose  views  on  public  policy 
are  sound,  and  whose  abilities  entitle  him  to  his  position,  he 
will  do  excellently  under  almost  any  chief  with  the  same 
purposes. 

I  at  once  announced  that  I  would  continue  unchanged 
McKinley's  policies  for  the  honor  and  prosperity  of  the 
country,  and  I  asked  all  the  members  of  the  Cabinet  to  stay. 
There  were  no  changes  made  among  them  save  as  changes 
were  made  among  their  successors  whom  I  myself  ap 
pointed.  I  continued  Mr.  McKinley's  policies,  changing  and 
developing  them  and  adding  new  policies  only  as  the  ques 
tions  before  the  public  changed  and  as  the  needs  of  the  pub 
lic  developed.  Some  of  my  friends  shook  their  heads  over 
this,  telling  me  that  the  men  I  retained  would  not  be  "  loyal 
to  me,"  and  that  I  would  seem  as  if  I  were  "a  pale  copy  of 
McKinley."  I  told  them  that  I  was  not  nervous  on  this 
score,  and  that  if  the  men  I  retained  were  loyal  to  their 
work  they  would  be  giving  me  the  loyalty  for  which  I  most 
cared ;  and  that  if  they  were  not,  I  would  change  them  any 
how;  and  that  as  for  being  "a  pale  copy  of  McKinley," 
I  was  not  primarily  concerned  with  either  following  or  not 
following  in  his  footsteps,  but  in  facing  the  new  problems 
that  arose ;  and  that  if  I  were  competent  I  would  find  ample 
opportunity  to  show  my  competence  by  my  deeds  without 
worrying  myself  as  to  how  to  convince  people  of  the  fact. 

For  the  reasons  I  have  already  given  in  my  chapter  on 
the  Governorship  of  New  York,  the  Republican  party,  which 
in  the  days  of  Abraham  Lincoln  was  founded  as  the  radical 


THE    PRESIDENCY  351 

progressive  party  of  the  Nation,  had  been  obliged  during 
the  last  decade  of  the  nineteenth  century  to  uphold  the  inter 
ests  of  popular  government  against  a  foolish  and  illjudged 
mock-radicalism.  It  remained  the  Nationalist  as  against 
the  particularist  or  State's  rights  party,  and  in  so  far  it  re 
mained  absolutely  sound ;  for  little  permanent  good  can  be 
done  by  any  party  which  worships  the  State 's  rights  fetish 
or  which  fails  to  regard  the  State,  like  the  county  or  the 
municipality,  as  merely  a  convenient  unit  for  local  self-gov 
ernment,  while  in  all  National  matters,  of  importance  to  the 
whole  people,  the  Nation  is  to  be  supreme  over  State, 
county,  and  town  alike.  But  the  State's  rights  fetish,  al 
though  still  effectively  used  at  certain  times  by  both  courts 
and  Congress  to  block  needed  National  legislation  directed 
against  the  huge  corporations  or  in  the  interests  of  work- 
ingmen,  was  not  a  prime  issue  at  the  time  of  which  I  speak. 
In  1896,  1898,  and  1900  the  campaigns  were  waged  on  two 
great  moral  issues:  (1)  the  imperative  need  of  a  sound  and 
honest  currency;  (2)  the  need,  after  1898,  of  meeting  in  man 
ful  and  straightforward  fashion  the  extraterritorial  prob 
lems 'arising  from  the  Spanish  "War.  On  these  great  moral 
issues  the  Eepublican  party  was  right,  and  the  men  who 
were  opposed  to  it,  and  who  claimed  to  be  the  radicals,  and 
their  allies  among  the  sentimentalists,  were  utterly  and 
hopelessly  wrong.  This  had,  regrettably  but  perhaps  in 
evitably,  tended  to  throw  the  party  into  the  hands  not 
merely  of  the  conservatives  but  of  the  reactionaries;  of 
men  who,  sometimes  for  personal  and  improper  reasons,  but 
more. of  ten  with  entire  sincerity  and  uprightness  of  purpose, 
distrusted  anything  that  was  progressive  and  dreaded  radi 
calism.  These  men  still  from  force  of  habit  applauded  what 
Lincoln  had  done  in  the  way  of  radical  dealing  with  the 
abuses  of  his  day ;  but  they  did  not  apply  the  spirit  in  which 
Lincoln  worked  to  the  abuses  of  their  own  day.  Both  houses 
of  Congress  were  controlled  by  these  men.  Their  leaders 
in  the  Senate  were  Messrs.  Aldrich  and  Hale.  The  Speaker 
of  the  House  when  I  became  President  was  Mr.  Henderson, 
but  in  a  little  over  a  year  he  was  succeeded  by  Mr.  Cannon, 


352    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

who,  although  widely  differing  from  Senator  Aldrich  in  mat 
ters  of  detail,  represented  the  same  type  of  public  senti 
ment.  There  were  many  points  on  which  I  agreed  with  Mr. 
Cannon  and  Mr.  Aldrich,  and  some  points  on  which  I  agreed 
with  Mr.  Hale.  I  made  a  resolute  effort  to  get  on  with  all 
three  and  with  their  followers,  and  I  have  no  question  that 
they  made  an  equally  resolute  effort  to  get  on  with  me.  We 
succeeded  in  working  together,  although  with  increasing 
friction,  for  some  years,  I  pushing  forward  and  they  hang 
ing  back.  Gradually,  however,  I  was  forced  to  abandon  the 
effort  to  persuade  them  to  come  my  way,  and  then  I  achieved 
results  only  by  appealing  over  the  heads  of  the  Senate  and 
House  leaders  to  the  people,  who  were  the  masters  of  both 
of  us.  I  continued  in  this  way  to  get  results  until  almost  the 
close  of  my  term;  and  the  Eepublican  party  became  once 
more  the  progressive  and  indeed  the  fairly  radical  progres 
sive  party  of  the  Nation.  When  my  successor  was  chosen, 
however,  the  leaders  of  the  House  and  Senate,  or  most  of 
them,  felt  that  it  was  safe  to  come  to  a  break  with  me,  and 
the  last  or  short  session  of  Congress,  held  between  the  elec 
tion  of  my  successor  and  his  inauguration  four  months  later, 
saw  a  series  of  contests  between  the  majorities  in  the  two 
houses  of  Congress  and  the  President, — myself, — quite  as 
bitter  as  if  they  and  I  had  belonged  to  opposite  political 
parties.  However,  I  held  my  own.  I  was  not  able  to  push 
through  the  legislation  I  desired  during  these  four  months, 
but  I  was  able  to  prevent  them  doing  anything  I  did  not  de 
sire,  or  undoing  anything  that  I  had  already  succeeded  in 
getting  done. 

There  were,  of  course,  many  Senators  and  members  of 
the  lower  house  with  whom  up  to  the  very  last  I  continued 
to  work  in  hearty  accord,  and  with  a  growing  understanding. 
I  have  not  the  space  to  enumerate,  as  I  would  like  to,  these 
men.  For  many  years  Senator  Lodge  had  been  my  close 
personal  and  political  friend,  with  whom  I  discussed  all  pub 
lic  questions,  that  arose,  usually  with  agreement;  and  our 
intimately  close  relations  were  of  course  unchanged  by  my 
entry  into  the  White  House.  He  was  of  all  our  public  men 


From  a  painting'  by  John  S.  Sargent.     Photograph  by  Frances  B.  Johnso... 

PRESIDENT  ROOSEVELT. 
From  a  Painting  by  John  S.  Sargent,  painted  in  the  White  House. 


THE    PRESIDENCY  353 

the  man  who  had  made  the  closest  and  wisest  study  of  our 
foreign  relations,  and  more  clearly  than  almost  any  other 
man  he  understood  the  vital  fact  that  the  efficiency  of  our 
navy  conditioned  our  national  efficiency  in  foreign  affairs. 
Anything  relating  to  our  international  relations,  from  Pan 
ama  and  the  navy  to  the  Alaskan  boundary  question,  the 
Algeciras  negotiations,  or  the  peace  of  Portsmouth,  I  was 
certain  to  discuss  with  Senator  Lodge  and  also  with  certain 
other  members  of  Congress,  such  as  Senator  Turner  of 
Washington  and  Kepresentative  Hitt  of  Illinois.  Anything 
relating  to  labor  legislation  and  to  measures  for  controlling 
big  business  or  efficiently  regulating  the  giant  railway  sys 
tems,  I  was  certain  to  discuss  with  Senator  Dolliver  or  Con 
gressman  Hepburn  or  Congressman  Cooper.  "With  men 
like  Senator  Beveridge,  Congressman  (afterwards  Senator) 
Dixon,  and  Congressman  Murdock,  I  was  apt  to  discuss 
pretty  nearly  everything  relating  to  either  our  internal  or 
our  external  affairs.  There  were  many,  many  others.  The 
present  President  of  the  Senate,  Senator  Clark,  of  Arkan 
sas,  was  as  fearless  and  high-minded  a  representative  of  the 
people  of  the  United  States  as  I  ever  dealt  with.  He  was  one 
of  the  men  who  combined  loyalty  to  his  own  State  with  an 
equally  keen  loyalty  to  the  people  of  all  the  United  States. 
He  was  politically  opposed  to  me ;  but  when  the  interests  of 
the  country  were  at  stake,  he  was  incapable  of  considering 
party  differences ;  and  this  was  especially  his  attitude  in  in 
ternational  matters — including  certain  treaties  which  most 
of  his  party  colleagues,  with  narrow  lack  of  patriotism,  and 
complete  subordination  of  National  to  factional  interest, 
opposed.  I  have  never  anywhere  met  finer,  more  faithful, 
more  disinterested,  and  more  loyal  public  servants  than 
Senator  0.  H.  Platt,  a  Kepublican,  from  Connecticut,  and 
Senator  Cockrell,  a  Democrat,  from  Missouri.  They  were 
already  old  men  when  I  came  to  the  Presidency ;  and  doubt 
less  there  were  points  on  which  I  seemed  to  them  to  be  ex 
treme  and  radical;  but  eventually  they  found  that  our 
motives  and  beliefs  were  the  same,  and  they  did  all  in  their 
power  to  help  any  movement  that  was  for  the  interest  of  our 


354    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

people  as  a  whole.  I  had  met  them  when  I  was  Civil  Service 
Commissioner  and  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Navy.  All 
I  ever  had  to  do  with  either  was  to  convince  him  that  a  given 
measure  I  championed  was  right,  and  he  then  at  once  did 
all  he  could  to  have  it  put  into  effect.  If  I  could  not  con 
vince  them,  why !  that  was  my  fault,  or  my  misfortune ;  but 
if  I  could  convince  them,  I  never  had  to  think  again  as  to 
whether  they  would  or  would  not  support  me.  There  were 
many  other  men  of  mark  in  both  houses  with  whom  I  could 
work  on  somejpoints,  whereas  on  others  we  had  to  differ. 
There  was  one  powerful  leader — a  burly,  forceful  man,  of 
admirable  traits — who  had,  however,  been  trained  in  the 
post-bellum  school  of  business  and  politics,  so  that  his  at 
titude  towards  life,  quite  unconsciously,  reminded  me  a 
little  of  Artemus  Ward's  view  of  the  Tower  of  London — 
<flf  I  like  it,  I'll  buy  it."  There  was  a  big  governmental 
job  in  which  this  leader  was  much  interested,  and  in  refer 
ence  to  which  he  always  wished  me  to  consult  a  man  whom 
he  trusted,  whom  I  will  call  Pitt  Rodney.  One  day  I  an 
swered  him,  "The  trouble  with  Eodney  is  that  he  mises 
timates  his  relations  to  cosmos";  to  which  he  responded, 
"Cosmos — Cosmos?  Never  heard  of  him.  You  stick  to 
Eodney.  He's  your  man!"  Outside  of  the  public  servants 
there  were  multitudes  of  men,  in  newspaper  offices,  in  maga 
zine  offices,  in  business  or  the  professions  or  on  farms  or  in 
shops,  who  actively  supported  the  policies  for  which  I  stood 
and  did  work  of  genuine  leadership  which  was  quite  as  effec 
tive  as  any  work  done  by  men  in  public  office.  Without  the 
active  support  of  these  men  I  would  have  been  powerless. 
In  particular,  the  leading  newspaper  correspondents  at 
Washington  were  as  a  whole  a  singularly  able,  trustworthy, 
and  public- spirited  body  of  men,  and  the  most  useful  of 
all  agents  in  the  fight  for  efficient  and  decent  government. 
As  for  the  men  under  me  in  executive  office,  I  could  not 
overstate  the  debt  of  gratitude  I  owe  them.  From  the 
heads  of  the  departments,  the  Cabinet  officers,  down,  the 
most  striking  feature  of  the  Administration  was  the  de 
voted,  zealous,  and  efficient  work  that  was  done  as  soon  as  it 


THE    PRESIDENCY  355 

became  understood  that  the  one  bond  of  interest  among  all 
of  us  was  the  desire  to  make  the  Government  the  most  effec 
tive  instrument  in  advancing  the  interests  of  the  people  as  a 
whole,  the  interests  of  the  average  men  and  women  of  the 
United  States  and  of  their  children.  I  do  not  think  I  over 
state  the  case  when  I  say  that  most  of  the  men  who  did  the 
best  work  under  me  felt  that  ours  was  a  partnership,  that 
we  all  stood  on  the  same  level  of  purpose  and  service,  and 
that  it  mattered  not  what  position  any  one  of  us  held  so 
long  as  in  that  position  he  gave  the  very  best  that  was  in 
him.  We  worked  very  hard ;  but  I  made  a  point  of  getting 
a  couple  of  hours  off  each  day  for  equally  vigorous  play. 
The  men  with  whom  I  then  played,  whom  we  laughingly 
grew  to  call  the  '  '  Tennis  Cabinet, ' '  have  been  mentioned  in 
a  previous  chapter  of  this  book  in  connection  with  the  gift 
they  gave  me  at  the  last  breakfast  which  they  took  at  the 
White  House.  There  were  many  others  in  the  public  service 
under  me  with  whom  I  happened  not  to  play,  but  who  did 
their  share  of  our  common  work  just  as  effectively  as  it 
was  done  by  us  who  did  play.  Of  course  nothing  could  have 
been  done  in  my  Administration  if  it  had  not  been  for  the 
zeal,  intelligence,  masterful  ability,  and  downright  hard 
labor  of  these  men  in  countless  positions  under  me.  I  was 
helpless  to  do  anything  except  as  my  thoughts  and  orders 
were  translated  into  action  by  them;  and,  moreover,  each 
of  them,  as  he  grew  specially  fit  for  his  job,  used  to  suggest 
to  me  the  right  thought  to  have,  and  the  right  order  to  give, 
concerning  that  job.  It  is  of  course  hard  for  me  to  speak 
with  cold  and  dispassionate  partiality  of  these  men,  who 
were  as  close  to  me  as  were  the  men  of  my  regiment.  But 
the  outside  observers  best  fitted  to  pass  judgment  about 
them  felt  as  I  did.  At  the  end  of  my  Administration  Mr. 
Bryce,  the  British  Ambassador,  told  me  that  in  a  long  life, 
during  which  he  had  studied  intimately  the  government  of 
many  different  countries,  he  had  never  in  any  country  seen 
a  more  eager,  high-minded,  and  efficient  set  of  public  serv 
ants,  men  more  useful  and  more  creditable  to  their  country, 
than  the  men  then  doing  the  work  of  the  American  Govern- 


356    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ment  in  Washington  and  in  the  field.  I  repeat  this  state 
ment  with  the  permission  of  Mr.  Bryce. 

At  about  the  same  time,  or  a  little  before,  in  the  spring  of 
1908,  there  appeared  in  the  English  Fortnightly  Review  an 
article,  evidently  by  a  competent  eye-witness,  setting  forth 
more  in  detail  the  same  views  to  which  the  British  Am 
bassador  thus  privately  gave  expression.  It  was  in  part  as 
follows : 

"Mr.  Roosevelt  has  gathered  around  him  a  body  of  pub 
lic  servants  who  are  nowhere  surpassed,  I  question  whether 
they  are  anywhere  equaled,  for  efficiency,  self-sacrifice,  and 
an  absolute  devotion  to  their  country's  interests.  Many 
of  them  are  poor  men,  without  private  means,  who  have 
voluntarily  abandoned  high  professional  ambitions  and 
turned  their  backs  on  the  rewards  of  business  to  serve  their 
country  on  salaries  that  are  not  merely  inadequate,  but  in 
decently  so.  There  is  not  one  of  them  who  is  not  constantly 
assailed  by  offers  of  positions  in  the  world  of  commerce, 
finance,  and  the  law  that  would  satisfy  every  material  am 
bition  with  which  he  began  life.  There  is  not  one  of  them 
who  could  not,  if  he  chose,  earn  outside  Washington  from 
ten  to  twenty  times  the  income  on  which  he  economizes  as 
a  State  official.  But  these  men  are  as  indifferent  to  money 
and  to  the  power  that  money  brings  as  to  the  allurements  of 
Newport  and  New  York,  or  to  merely  personal  distinctions, 
or  to  the  commercialized  ideals  which  the  great  bulk  of  their 
fellow-countrymen  accept  without  question.  They  are  con 
tent,  and  more  than  content,  to  sink  themselves  in  the  Na 
tional  service  without  a  thought  of  private  advancement, 
and  often  at  a  heavy  sacrifice  of  worldly  honors,  and  to 
toil  on  ...  sustained  by  their  own  native  impulse  to  make 
of  patriotism  an  efficient  instrument  of  public  betterment. ' ' 

The  American  public  rarely  appreciate  the  high  quality 
of  the  work  done  by  some  of  our  diplomats — work,  usually 
entirely  unnoticed  and  unrewarded,  which  redounds  to  the 
interest  and  the  honor  of  all  of  us.  The  most  useful  man  in 
the  entire  diplomatic  service,  during  my  Presidency,  and 
for  many  years  before,  was  Henry  White;  and  I  say  this 


THE    PRESIDENCY  357 

having  in  mind  the  high  quality  of  work  done  by  such  ad 
mirable  ambassadors  and  ministers  as  Bacon,  Meyer, 
Straus,  O'Brien,  Eockhill,  and  Egan,  to  name  only  a  few 
among  many.  When  I  left  the  presidency  White  was  Am 
bassador  to  France ;  shortly  afterwards  he  was  removed  by 
Mr.  Taft,  for  reasons  unconnected  with  the  good  of  the 
service. 

The  most  important  factor  in  getting  the  right  spirit  in 
my  Administration,  next  to  the  insistence  upon  courage, 
honesty,  and  a  genuine  democracy  of  desire  to  serve  the 
plain  people,  was  my  insistence  upon  the  theory  that  the 
executive  power  was  limited  only  by  specific  restrictions  and 
prohibitions  appearing  in  the  Constitution  or  imposed  by 
the  Congress  under  its  Constitutional  powers.  My  view 
was  that  every  executive  officer,  and  above  all  every  execu 
tive  officer  in  high  position,  was  a  steward  of  the  people 
bound  actively  and  affirmatively  to  do  all  he  could  for  the 
people,  and  not  to  content  himself  with  the  negative  merit 
of  keeping  his  talents  undamaged  in  a  napkin.  I  declined  to 
adopt  the  view  that  what  was  imperatively  necessary  for 
the  Nation  could  not  be  done  by  the  President  unless  he 
could  find  some  specific  authorization  to  do  it.  My  belief 
was  that  it  was  not  only  his  right  but  his  duty  to  do  anything 
that  the  needs  of  the  Nation  demanded  unless  such  action 
was  forbidden  by  the  Constitution  or  by  the  laws.  Under 
this  interpretation  of  executive  power  I  did  and  caused  to 
be  done  many  things  not  previously  done  by  the  President 
and  the  heads  of  the  departments.  I  did  not  usurp  power, 
but  I  did  greatly  broaden  the  use  of  executive  power.  In 
other  words,  I  acted  for  the  public  welfare,  I  acted  for  the 
common  well-being  of  all  our  people,  whenever  and  in  what 
ever  manner  was  necessary,  unless  prevented  by  direct  con 
stitutional  or  legislative  prohibition.  I  did  not  care  a  rap 
for  the  mere  form  and  show  of  power;  I  cared  immensely 
for  the  use  that  could  be  made  of  the  substance.  The  Senate 
at  one  time  objected  to  my  communicating  with  them  in 
printing,  preferring  the  expensive,  foolish,  and  laborious 
practice  of  writing  out  the  messages  by  hand.  It  was  not 


358    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

possible  to  return  to  the  outworn  archaism  of  hand  writing ; 
but  we  endeavored  to  have  the  printing  made  as  pretty  as 
possible.  Whether  I  communicated  with  the  Congress  in 
writing  or  by  word  of  mouth,  and  whether  the  writing  was 
by  a  machine,  or  a  pen,  were  equally,  and  absolutely,  unim 
portant  matters.  The  importance  lay  in  what  I  said  and  in 
the  heed  paid  to  what  I  said.  So  as  to  my  meeting  and  con 
sulting  Senators,  Congressmen,  politicians,  financiers,  and 
labor  men.  I  consulted  all  who  wished  to  see  me ;  and  if  I 
wished  to  see  any  one,  I  sent  for  him;  and  where  the  con 
sultation  took  place  was  a  matter  of  supreme  unimportance. 
I  consulted  every  man  with  the  sincere  hope  that  I  could 
profit  by  and  follow  his  advice ;  I  consulted  every  member 
of  Congress  who  wished  to  be  consulted,  hoping  to  be  able 
to  come  to  an  agreement  of  action  with  him;  and  I  always 
finally  acted  as  my  conscience  and  common  sense  bade  me 
act. 

About  appointments  I  was  obliged  by  the  Constitution 
to  consult  the  Senate;  and  the  long-established  custom  of 
the  Senate  meant  that  in  practice  this  consultation  was 
with  individual  Senators  and  even  with  big  politicians  who 
stood  behind  the  Senators.  I  was  only  one-half  the  appoint 
ing  power ;  I  nominated ;  but  the  Senate  confirmed.  In  prac 
tice,  by  what  was  called  ' '  the  courtesy  of  the  Senate, ' '  the 
Senate  normally  refused  to  confirm  any  appointment  if  the 
Senator  from  the  State  objected  to  it.  In  exceptional  cases, 
where  I  could  arouse  public  attention,  I  could  force  through 
the  appointment  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  Senators ; 
in  all  ordinary  cases  this  was  impossible.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Senator  could  of  course  do  nothing  for  any  man 
unless  I  chose  to  nominate  him.  In  consequence  the  Con 
stitution  itself  forced  the  President  and  the  Senators  from 
each  State  to  come  to  a  working  agreement  on  the  appoint 
ments  in  and  from  that  State. 

My  course  was  to  insist  on  absolute  fitness,  including 
honesty,  as  a  prerequisite  to  every  appointment;  and  to 
remove  only  for  good  cause,  and,  where  there  was  such 
cause,  to  refuse  even  to  discuss  with  the  Senator  in  interest 


THE   PRESIDENCY  359 

the  unfit  servant's  retention.  Subject  to  these  considera 
tions,  I  normally  accepted  each  Senator's  recommenda 
tions  for  offices  of  a  routine  kind,  such  as  most  post-offices 
and  the  like,  but  insisted  on  myself  choosing  the  men  for 
the  more  important  positions.  I  was  willing  to  take  any 
good  man  for  postmaster ;  but  in  the  case  of  a  Judge  or  Dis 
trict  Attorney  or  Canal  Commissioner  or  Ambassador,  I 
was  apt  to  insist  either  on  a  given  man  or  else  on  any  man 
with  a  given  class  of  qualifications.  If  the  Senator  deceived 
me,  I  took  care  that  he  had  no  opportunity  to  repeat  the 
deception. 

I  can  perhaps  best  illustrate  my  theory  of  action  by  two 
specific  examples.  In  New  York  Governor  Odell  and  Sena 
tor  Platt  sometimes  worked  in  agreement  and  sometimes 
were  at  swords'  points,  and  both  wished  to  be  consulted. 
To  a  friendly  Congressman,  who  was  also  their  friend,  I 
wrote  as  follows  on  July  22, 1903 : 

"I  want  to  work  with  Platt.  I  want  to  work  with  Odell. 
I  want  to  support  both  and  take  the  advice  of  both.  But 
of  course  ultimately  I  must  be  the  judge  as  to  acting  on  the 
advice  given.  "When,  as  in  the  case  of  the  judgeship,  I  am 
convinced  that  the  advice  of  both  is  wrong,  I  shall  act  as  I 
did  when  I  appointed  Holt.  When  I  can  find  a  friend  of 
OdelPs  like  Cooley,  who  is  thoroughly  fit  for  the  position 
I  desire  to  fill,  it  gives  me  the  greatest  pleasure  to  appoint 
him.  When  Platt  proposes  to  me  a  man  like  Hamilton  Fish, 
it  is  equally  a  pleasure  to  appoint  him." 

This  was  written  in  connection  with  events  which  led 
up  to  my  refusing  to  accept  Senator  Platt 's  or  Governor 
OdelPs  suggestions  as  to  a  Federal  Judgeship  and  a  Federal 
District  Attorneyship,  and  insisting  on  the  appointment, 
first  of  Judge  Hough  and  later  of  District  Attorney  Stim- 
son;  because  in  each  case  I  felt  that  the  work  to  be  done 
was  of  so  high  an  order  that  I  could  not  take  an  ordi 
nary  man. 

The  other  case  was  that  of  Senator  Fulton,  of  Oregon. 
Through  Francis  Heney  I  was  prosecuting  men  who  were 
implicated  in  a  vast  network  of  conspiracy  against  the  law 


360    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

in  connection  with  the  theft  of  public  land  in  Oregon.  I 
had  been  acting  on  Senator  Fulton's  recommendations  for 
office,  in  the  usual  manner.  Heney  had  been  insisting  that 
Fulton  was  in  league  with  the  men  we  were  prosecuting, 
and  that  he  had  recommended  unfit  men.  Fulton  had  been 
protesting  against  my  following  Heney 's  advice,  particu 
larly  as  regards  appointing  Judge  Wolverton  as  United 
States  Judge.  Finally  Heney  laid  before  me  a  report  which 
convinced  me  of  the  truth  of  his  statements.  I  then  wrote 
to  Fulton  as  follows,  on  November  20, 1905 :  '  '  My  dear  Sen 
ator  Fulton:  I  inclose  you  herewith  a  copy  of  the  report 
made  to  me  by  Mr.  Heney.  I  have  seen  the  originals  of  the 
letters  from  you  and  Senator  Mitchell  quoted  therein.  I  do 
not  at  this  time  desire  to  discuss  the  report  itself,  which  of 
course  I  must  submit  to  the  Attorney-General.  But  I  have 
been  obliged  to  reach  the  painful  conclusion  that  your  own 
letters  as  therein  quoted  tend  to  show  that  you  recommended 
for  the  position  of  District  Attorney  B  when  you  had  good 
reason  to  believe  that  he  had  himself  been  guilty  of  fraud 
ulent  conduct;  that  you  recommended  C  for  the  same  po 
sition  simply  because  it  was  for  B 's  interest  that  he  should 
be  so  recommended,  and,  as  there  is  reason  to  believe,  be 
cause  he  had  agreed  to  divide  the  fees  with  B  if  he  were 
appointed ;  and  that  you  finally  recommended  the  reappoint- 
ment  of  H  with  the  knowledge  that  if  H  were  appointed  he 
would  abstain  from  prosecuting  B  for  criminal  misconduct, 
this  being  why  B  advocated  II  's  claims  for  reappointment. 
If  you  care  to  make  any  statement  in  the  matter,  I  shall  of 
course  be  glad  to  hear  it.  As  the  District  Judge  of  Oregon 
I  shall  appoint  Judge  Wolverton. ' '  In  the  letter  I  of  course 
gave  in  full  the  names  indicated  above  by  initials.  Senator 
Fulton  gave  no  explanation.  I  therefore  ceased  to  consult 
him  about  appointments  under  the  Department  of  Justice 
and  the  Interior,  the  two  departments  in  which  the  crooked 
ness  had  occurred — there  was  no  question  of  crookedness  in 
the  other  offices  in  the  State,  and  they  could  be  handled  in 
the  ordinary  manner.  Legal  proceedings  were  undertaken 
against  his  colleague  in  the  Senate,  and  one  of  his  col- 


THE    PEESIDENCY  361 

leagues  in  the  lower  house,  and  the  former  was  convicted 
and  sentenced  to  the  penitentiary. 

In  a  number  of  instances  the  legality  of  executive  acts 
of  my  Administration  was  brought  before  the  courts.  They 
were  uniformly  sustained.  For  example,  prior  to  1907 
statutes  relating  to  the  disposition  of  coal  lands  had  been 
construed  as  fixing  the  flat  price  at  $10  to  $20  per  acre. 
The  result  was  that  valuable  coal  lands  were  sold  for  wholly 
inadequate  prices,  chiefly  to  big  corporations.  By  execu 
tive  order  the  coal  lands  were  withdrawn  and  not  opened 
for  entry  until  proper  classification  was  placed  thereon  by 
Government  agents.  There  was  a  great  clamor  that  I  was 
usurping  legislative  power ;  but  the  acts  were  not  assailed 
in  court  until  we  brought  suits  to  set  aside  entries  made  by 
persons  and  associations  to  obtain  larger  areas  than  the 
statutes  authorized.  This  position  was  opposed  on  the 
ground  that  the  restrictions  imposed  were  illegal;  that  the 
executive  orders  were  illegal.  The  Supreme  Court  sus 
tained  the  Government.  In  the  same  way  our  attitude  in 
the  water  power  question  was  sustained,  the  Supreme  Court 
holding  that  the  Federal  Government  had  the  rights  we 
claimed  over  streams  that  are  or  may  be  declared  navigable 
by  Congress.  Again,  when  Oklahoma  became  a  State  we 
were  obliged  to  use  the  executive  power  to  protect  Indian 
rights  and  property,  for  there  had  been  an  enormous 
amount  of  fraud  in  the  obtaining  of  Indian  lands  by  white 
men.  Here  we  were  denounced  as  usurping  power  over  a 
State  as  well  as  usurping  power  that  did  not  belong  to  the 
executive.  The  Supreme  Court  sustained  our  action. 

In  connection  with  the  Indians,  by  the  way,  it  was  again 
and  again  necessary  to  assert  the  position  of  the  President 
as  steward  of  the  whole  people.  I  had  a  capital  Indian 
Commissioner,  Francis  E.  Leupp.  I  found  that  I  could 
rely  on  his  judgment  not  to  get  me  into  fights  that  were 
unnecessary,  and  therefore  I  always  backed  him  to  the  limit 
when  he  told  me  that* a  fight  was  necessary.  On  one  occa 
sion,  for  example,  Congress  passed  a  bill  to  sell  to  settlers 
about  half  a  million  acres  of  Indian  land  in  Oklahoma  at 


362    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

one  and  a  half  dollars  an  acre.  I  refused  to  sign  it,  and 
turned  the  matter  over  to  Leupp.  The  bill  was  accordingly 
withdrawn,  amended  so  as  to  safeguard  the  welfare  of  the 
Indians,  and  the  minimum  price  raised  to  five  dollars  an 
acre.  Then  I  signed  the  bill.  We  sold  that  land  under 
sealed  bids,  and  realized  for  the  Kiowa,  Comanche,  and 
Apache  Indians  more  than  four  million  dollars — three  mill 
ions  and  a  quarter  more  than  they  would  have  obtained  if 
I  had  signed  the  bill  in  its  original  form.  In  another  case, 
where  there  had  been  a  division  among  the  Sac  and  Fox 
Indians,  part  of  the  tribe  removing  to  Iowa,  the  Iowa  dele 
gation  in  Congress,  backed  by  two  lowans  who  were  mem 
bers  of  my  Cabinet,  passed  a  bill  awarding  a  sum  of  nearly 
a  half  million  dollars  to  the  Iowa  seceders.  They  had  not 
consulted  the  Indian  Bureau.  Leupp  protested  against  the 
bill,  and  I  vetoed  it.  A  subsequent  bill  was  passed  on  the 
lines  laid  down  by  the  Indian  Bureau,  referring  the  whole 
controversy  to  the  courts,  and  the  Supreme  Court  in  the 
end  justified  our  position  by  deciding  against  the  Iowa 
seceders  and  awarding  the  money  to  the  Oklahoma  stay- 
at-homes. 

As  to  all  action  of  this  kind  there  have  long  been  two 
schools  of  political  thought,  upheld  with  equal  sincerity. 
The  division  has  not  normally  been  along  political,  but 
temperamental,  lines.  The  course  I  followed,  of  regarding 
the  executive  as  subject  only  to  the  people,  and,  under  the 
Constitution,  bound  to  serve  the  people  affirmatively  in 
cases  where  the  Constitution  does  not  explicitly  forbid  him 
to  render  the  service,  was  substantially  the  course  followed 
by  both  Andrew  Jackson  and  Abraham  Lincoln.  Other 
honorable  and  well-meaning  Presidents,  such  as  James 
Buchanan,  took  the  opposite  and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  nar 
rowly  legalistic  view  that  the  President  is  the  servant  of 
Congress  rather  than  of  the  people,  and  can  do  nothing,  no 
matter  how  necessary  it  be  to  act,  unless  the  Constitution 
explicitly  commands  the  action.  Most  able  lawyers  who  are 
past  middle  age  take  this  view,  and  so  do  large  numbers 
of  woll-meaning,  respectable  citizens.  My  successor  in  of- 


THE    PRESIDENCY  363 

fice  took  this,  the  Buchanan,  view  of  the  President 's  powers 
and  duties. 

For  example,  under  my  Administration  we  found  that 
one  of  the  favorite  methods  adopted  by  the  men  desirous  of 
stealing  the  public  domain  was  to  carry  the  decision  of 
the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  into  court.  By  vigorously 
opposing  such  action,  and  only  by  so  doing,  we  were  able 
to  carry  out  the  policy  of  properly  protecting  the  public 
domain.  My  successor  not  only  took  the  opposite  view, 
but  recommended  to  Congress  the  passage  of  a  bill  which 
would  have  given  the  courts  direct  appellate  power  over 
the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  in  these  land  matters.  This 
bill  was  reported  favorably  by  Mr.  Mondell,  Chairman  of 
the  House  Committee  on  public  lands,  a  Congressman  who 
took  the  lead  in  every  measure  to  prevent  the  conservation 
of  our  natural  resources  and  the  preservation  of  the  Na 
tional  domain  for  the  use  of  home-seekers.  Fortunately, 
Congress  declined  to  pass  the  bill.  Its  passage  would  have 
been  a  veritable  calamity. 

I  acted  on  the  theory  that  the  President  could  at  any  time 
in  his  discretion  withdraw  from  entry  any  of  the  public 
lands  of  the  United  States  and  reserve  the  same  for  for 
estry,  for  water-power  sites,  for  irrigation,  and  other  public 
purposes.  Without  such  action  it  would  have  been  impos 
sible  to  stop  the  activity  of  the  land  thieves.  No  one  ven 
tured  to  test  its  legality  by  lawsuit.  My  successor,  however, 
himself  questioned  it,  and  referred  the  matter  to  Congress. 
Again  Congress  showed  its  wisdom  by  passing  a  law  which 
gave  the  President  the  power  which  he  had  long  exercised, 
and  of  which  my  successor  had  shorn  himself. 

Perhaps  the  sharp  difference  between  what  may  be  called 
the  Lincoln-Jackson  and  the  Buchanan-Taft  schools,  in 
their  views  of  the  power  and  duties  of  the  President,  may 
be  best  illustrated  by  comparing  the  attitude  of  my  suc 
cessor  toward  his  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Mr.  Ballinger, 
when  the  latter  was  accused  of  gross  misconduct  in  office, 
with  my  attitude  towards  my  chiefs  of  department  and 
other  subordinate  officers.  More  than  once  while  I  was 


364    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

President  my  officials  were  attacked  by  Congress,  generally 
because  these  officials  did  their  duty  well  and  fearlessly. 
In  every  such  case  I  stood  by  the  official  and  refused  to 
recognize  the  right  of  Congress  to  interfere  with  me  ex 
cepting  by  impeachment  or  in  other  Constitutional  manner. 
On  the  other  hand,  wherever  I  found  the  officer  unfit  for  his 
position,  I  promptly  removed  him,  even  although  the  most 
influential  men  in  Congress  fought  for  his  retention.  The 
Jackson-Lincoln  view  is  that  a  President  who  is  fit  to  do 
good  Avork  should  be  able  to  form  his  own  judgment  as  to 
his  own  subordinates,  and,  above  all,  of  the  subordinates 
Standing  highest  and  in  closest  and  most  intimate  touch 
with  him.  My  secretaries  and  their  subordinates  were  re 
sponsible  to  me,  and  I  accepted  the  responsibility  for  all 
their  deeds.  As  long  as  they  were  satisfactory  to  me  I 
stood  by  them  against  every  critic  or  assailant,  within  or 
without  Congress ;  and  as  for  getting  Congress  to  make  up 
my  mind  for  me  about  them,  the  thought  would  have  been 
inconceivable  to  me.  My  successor  took  the  opposite,  or 
Buchanan,  view  when  he  permitted  and  requested  Congress 
to  pass  judgment  on  the  charges  made  against  Mr.  Ballinger 
as  an  executive  officer.  These  charges  were  made  to  the 
President;  the  President  had  the  facts  before  him  and 
could  get  at  them  at  any  time,  and  he  alone  had  power  to 
act  if  the  charges  were  true.  However,  he  permitted  and 
requested  Congress  to  investigate  Mr.  Ballinger.  The 
party  minority  of  the  committee  that  investigated  him,  and 
one  member  of  the  majority,  declared  that  the  charges 
were  well  founded  and  that  Mr.  Ballinger  should  be  re 
moved.  The  other  members  of  the  majority  declared  the 
charges  ill  founded.  The  President  abode  by  the  view  of 
the  majority.  Of  course  believers  in  the  Jackson-Lincoln 
theory  of  the  Presidency  would  not  be  content  with  this 
town  meeting  majority  and  minority  method  of  determining 
by  another  branch  of  the  Government  Avhat  it  seems  the 
especial  duty  of  the  President  himself  to  determine  for 
himself  in  dealing  with  his  own  subordinate  in  his  own 
department. 


THE    PRESIDENCY  3G5 

There  are  many  worthy  people  who  reprobate  the  Bu 
chanan  method  as  a  matter  of  history,  but  who  in  actual 
life  reprobate  still  more  strongly  the  Jackson-Lincoln 
method  when  it  is  put  into  practice.  These  persons  con 
scientiously  believe  that  the  President  should  solve  every 
doubt  in  favor  of  inaction  as  against  action,  that  he  should 
construe  strictly  and  narrowly  the  Constitutional  grant  of 
powers  both  to  the  National  Government,  and  to  the  Pres 
ident  within  the  National  Government.  In  addition,  how 
ever,  to  the  men  who  conscientiously  believe  in  this  course 
from  high,  although  as  I  hold  misguided,  motives,  there 
are  many  men  who  affect  to  believe  in  it  merely  because 
it  enables  them  to  attack  and  to  try  to  hamper,  for  partisan 
or  personal  reasons,  an  executive  whom  they  dislike.  There 
are  other  men  in  whom,  especially  when  they  are  themselves 
in  office,  practical  adherence  to  the  Buchanan  principle 
represents  not  well-thought-out  devotion  to  an  unwise 
course,  but  simple  weakness  of  character  and  desire  to 
avoid  trouble  and  responsibility.  Unfortunately,  in  prac 
tice  it  makes  little  difference  which  class  of  ideas  actuates 
the  President,  who  by  his  action  sets  a  cramping  precedent. 
Whether  he  is  highminded  and  wrongheaded  or  merely 
infirm  of  purpose,  whether  he  means  well  feebly  or  is  bound 
by  a  mischievous  misconception  of  the  powers  and  duties 
of  the  National  Government  and  of  the  President,  the  effect 
of  his  actions  is  the  same.  The  President's  duty  is  to  act 
so  that  he  himself  and  his  subordinates  shall  be  able  to  do 
efficient  work  for  the  people,  and  this  efficient  work  he  and 
they  cannot  do  if  Congress  is  permitted  to  undertake  the 
task  of  making  up  his  mind  for  him  as  to  how  he  shall 
perform  what  is  clearly  his  sole  duty. 

One  of  the  ways  in  which  by  independent  action  of  the 
executive  we  were  able  to  accomplish  an  immense  amount 
of  work  for  the  public  was  through  volunteer  unpaid  com 
missions  appointed  by  the  President.  It  was  possible  to 
get  the  work  done  by  these  volunteer  commissions  only 
because  of  the  enthusiasm  for  the  public  service  which, 
starting  in  the  higher  offices  at  Washington,  made  itself 


366    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

felt  throughout  the  Government  departments — as  I  have 
said,  I  never  knew  harder  and  more  disinterested  work 
done  by  any  people  than  was  done  by  the  men  and  women 
of  all  ranks  in  the  Government  service.  The  contrast  was 
really  extraordinary  between  their  live  interest  in  their 
work  and  the  traditional  clerical  apathy  which  has  so  often 
been  the  distinguishing  note  of  governmental  work  in  Wash 
ington.  Most  of  the  public  service  performed  by  these 
volunteer  commissions,  carried  on  without  a  cent  of  pay 
to  the  men  themselves,  and  wholly  without  cost  to  the  Gov 
ernment,  was  done  by  men  the  great  majority  of  whom 
were  already  in  the  Government  service  and  already 
charged  with  responsibilities  amounting  each  to  a  full 
man's  job. 

The  first  of  these  Commissions  was  the  Commission  on 
the  Organization  of  Government  Scientific  Work,  whose 
Chairman  was  Charles  D.  Walcott.  Appointed  March  13, 
1903,  its  duty  was  to  report  directly  to  the  President  "upon 
the  organization,  present  condition,  and  needs  of  the  Exec 
utive  Government  work  wholly  or  partly  scientific  in  char 
acter,  and  upon  the  steps  which  should  be  taken,  if  any, 
to  prevent  the  duplication  of  such  work,  to  co-ordinate  its 
various  branches,  to  increase  its  efficiency  and  economy, 
and  to  promote  its  usefulness  to  the  Nation  at  large. " 
This  Commission  spent  four  months  in  an  examination 
which  covered  the  work  of  about  thirty  of  the  larger  sci 
entific  and  executive  bureaus  of  the  Government,  and  pre 
pared  a  report  which  furnished  the  basis  for  numerous 
improvements  in  the  Government  service. 

Ajiother  Commission,  appointed  June  2,  1905,  was  that 
on  Departmental  Methods — Charles  H.  Keep,  Chairman 
— whose  task  was  to  "find  out  what  changes  are  needed 
to  place  the  conduct  of  the  executive  business  of  the  Govern 
ment  in  all  its  branches  on  the  most  economical  and  effective 
basis  in  the  light  of  the  best  modern  business  practice. " 
The  letter  appointing  this  Commission  laid  down  nine 
principles  of  effective  Governmental  work,  the  most  strik 
ing  of  which  was :  "The  existence  of  any  method,  standard, 


THE    PRESIDENCY  367 

custom,  or  practice  is  no  reason  for  its  continuance  when 
a  better  is  offered/'  This  Commission,  composed  like  that 
just  described,  of  men  already  charged  with  important 
work,  performed  its  functions  wholly  without  cost  to  the 
Government.  It  was  assisted  by  a  body  of  about  seventy 
experts  in  the  Government  departments  chosen  for  their 
special  qualifications  to  carry  forward  a  study  of  the  best 
methods  in  business,  and  organized  into  assistant  com 
mittees  under  the  leadership  of  Overton  W.  Price,  Secretary 
of  the  Commission.  These  assistant  committees,  all  of 
whose  members  were  still  carrying  on  their  regular  work, 
made  their  reports  during  the  last  half  of  1906.  The  Com 
mittee  informed  itself  fully  regarding  the  business  methods 
of  practically  every  individual  branch  of  the  business  of  the 
Government,  and  effected  a  marked  improvement  in  general 
efficiency  throughout  the  service.  The  conduct  of  the 
routine  business  of  the  Government  had  never  been  thor 
oughly  overhauled  before,  and  this  examination  of  it  re 
sulted  in  the  promulgation  of  a  set  of  working  principles 
for  the  transaction  of  public  business  which  are  as  sound 
to-day  as  they  were  when  the  Committee  finished  its  work. 
The  somewhat  elaborate  and  costly  investigations  of  Gov 
ernment  business  methods  since  made  have  served  merely 
to  confirm  the  findings  of  the  Committee  on  Departmental 
Methods,  which  were  achieved  without  costing  the  Gov 
ernment  a  dollar.  The  actual  saving  in  the  conduct  of  the 
business  of  the  Government  through  the  better  methods 
thus  introduced  amounted  yearly  to  many  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  dollars;  but  a  far  more  important  gain  was 
due  to  the  remarkable  success  of  the  Commission  in  estab 
lishing  a  new  point  of  view  in  public  servants  toward  their 
work. 

The  need  for  improvement  in  the  Governmental  methods 
of  transacting  business  may  be  illustrated  by  an  actual  case. 
An  officer  in  charge  of  an  Indian  agency  made  a  requisition 
in  the  autumn  for  a  stove  costing  seven  dollars,  certifying 
at  the  same  time  that  it  was  needed  to  keep  the  infirmary 
warm  during  the  winter,  because  the  old  stove  was  worn 


368    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

out.  Thereupon  the  customary  papers  went  through  the 
customary  routine,  without  unusual  delay  at  any  point. 
The  transaction  moved  like  a  glacier  with  dignity  to  its 
appointed  end,  and  the  stove  reached  the  infirmary  in  good 
order  in  time  for  the  Indian  agent  to  acknowledge  its  arrival 
in  these  words:  "The  stove  is  here.  So  is  spring." 

The  Civil  Service  Commission,  under  men  like  John 
Mcllhenny  and  Garfield,  rendered  service  without  which 
the  Government  could  have  been  conducted  with  neither 
efficiency  nor  honesty.  The  politicians  were  not  the  only 
persons  at  fault;  almost  as  much  improper  pressure  for 
appointments  is  due  to  mere  misplaced  sympathy,  and  to 
the  spiritless  inefficiency  which  seeks  a  Government  office 
as  a  haven  for  the  incompetent.  An  amusing  feature  of 
office  seeking  is  that  each  man  desiring  an  office  is  apt  to 
look  down  on  all  others  with  the  same  object  as  forming 
an  objectionable  class  with  which  lie  has  nothing  in  common. 
At  the  time  of  the  eruption  of  Mt.  Pelee,  when  among  others 
the  American  Consul  was  killed,  a  man  who  had  long  been 
seeking  an  appointment  promptly  applied  for  the  vacancy. 
He  was  a  good  man,  of  persistent  nature,  who  felt  I  had 
been  somewhat  blind  to  his  merits.  The  morning  after  the 
catastrophe  he  wrote,  saying  that  as  the  consul  was  dead 
he  would  like  his  place,  and  that  I  could  surely  give  it  to 
him,  because  "even  the  officeseekers  could  not  have  applied 
for  it  yet!" 

The  method  of  public  service  involved  in  the  appointment 
and  the  work  of  the  two  commissions  just  described  was 
applied  also  in  the  establishment  of  four  other  commis 
sions,  each  of  which  performed  its  task  without  salary  or 
expense  for  its  members,  and  wholly  without  cost  to  the 
Government.  The  other  four  commissions  were : 

Commission  on  Public  Lands ; 

Commission  on  Inland  Waterways; 

Commission  on  Country  Life ;  and 

Commission  on  National  Conservation. 

All  of  these  commissions  were  suggested  to  me  by  Gifford 
Pinch ot,  who  served  upon  them  all.  The  work  of  the  last 


THE    PRESIDENCY  369 

four  will  be  touched  upon  in  connection  with  the  chapter 
on  Conservation.  These  commissions  by  their  reports  and 
findings  directly  interfered  with  many  place-holders  who- 
were  doing  inefficient  work,  and  their  reports  and  the  ac 
tion  taken  thereon  by  the  Administration  strengthened  the 
hands  of  those  administrative  officers  who  in  the  various 
departments,  and  especially  in  the  Secret  Service,  were 
proceeding  against  land  thieves  and  other  corrupt  wrong 
doers.  Moreover,  the  mere  fact  that  they  did  efficient  work 
for  the  public  along  lines  new  to  veteran  and  cynical  poli 
ticians  of  the  old  type  created  vehement  hostility  to  them. 
Senators  like  Mr.  Hale  and  Congressmen  like  Mr.  Tawney 
were  especially  bitter  against  these  commissions;  and 
towards  the  end  of  my  term  they  were  followed  by  the 
majority  of  their  fellows  in  both  houses,  who  had  gradually 
been  sundered  from  me  by  the  open  or  covert  hostility  of 
the  financial  or  Wall  Street  leaders,  and  of  the  newspaper 
editors  and  politicians  who  did  their  bidding  in  the  in 
terest  of  privilege.  These  Senators  and  Congressmen  as 
serted  that  they  had  a  right  to  forbid  the  President  profit 
ing  by  the  unpaid  advice  of  disinterested  experts.  Of  course 
I  declined  to  admit  the  existence  of  any  such  right,  and 
continued  the  Commissions.  My  successor  acknowledged 
the  right,  upheld  the  view  of  the  politicians  in  question, 
and  abandoned  the  commissions,  to  the  lasting  detriment 
of  the  people  as  a  whole. 

One  thing  is  worth  pointing  out :  During  the  seven  and 
a  half  years  of  my  Administration  we  greatly  and  usefully 
extended  the  sphere  of  Governmental  action,  and  yet  we 
reduced  the  burden  of  the  taxpayers;  for  we  reduced  the 
interest-bearing  debt  by  more  than  $90,000,000.  To  achieve 
a  marked  increase  in  efficiency  and  at  the  same  time  an 
increase  in  economy  is  not  an  easy  feat;  but  we  per 
formed  it. 

There  was  one  ugly  and  very  necessary  task.  This  was 
to  discover  and  root  out  corruption  wherever  it  was  found 
in  any  of  the  departments.  The  first  essential  was  to  make 
it  clearly  understood  that  no  political  or  business  or  social 


370    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

influence  of  any  kind  would  for  one  moment  be  even  con 
sidered  when  the  honesty  of  a  public  official  was  at  issue. 
It  took  a  little  time  to  get  this  fact  thoroughly  drilled  into 
the  heads  both  of  the  men  within  the  service  and  of  the 
political  leaders  without.  The  feat  was  accomplished  so 
thoroughly  that  every  effort  to  interfere  in  any  shape  or 
way  with  the  course  of  justice  was  abandoned  definitely 
and  for  good.  Most,  although  not  all,  of  the  frauds  oc 
curred  in  connection  with  the  Post-Office  Department  and 
the  Land  Office. 

It  was  in  the  Post-Office  Department  that  we  first  defi 
nitely  established  the  rule  of  conduct  which  became  uni 
versal  throughout  the  whole  service.  Kumors  of  corruption 
in  the  department  became  rife,  and  finally  I  spoke  of  them 
to  the  then  First  Assistant  Postmaster-General,  afterwards 
Postmaster-General,  Kobert  J.  Wynne.  He  reported  to 
me,  after  some  investigation,  that  in  his  belief  there  was 
doubtless  corruption,  but  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  get  at 
it,  and  that  the  offenders  were  confident  and  defiant  be 
cause  of  their  great  political  and  business  backing  and  the 
ramifications  of  their  crimes.  Talking  the  matter  over  with 
him,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  right  man  to  carry 
on  the  investigation  was  the  then  Fourth  Assistant  Post 
master-General,  now  a  Senator  from  Kansas,  Joseph  L. 
Bristow,  who  possessed  the  iron  fearlessness  needful  to 
front  such  a  situation.  Mr.  Bristow  had  perforce  seen  a 
good  deal  of  the  seamy  side  of  politics,  and  of  the  extent 
of  the  unscrupulousness  with  which  powerful  influence  was 
brought  to  bear  to  shield  offenders.  Before  undertaking 
the  investigation  he  came  to  see  me,  and  said  that  he  did 
not  wish  to  go  into  it  unless  he  could  be  assured  that  I 
would  stand  personally  behind  him,  and,  no  matter  where 
his  inquiries  led  him,  would  support  him  and  prevent  inter 
ference  with  him.  I  answered  that  I  would  certainly  do 
so.  He  went  into  the  investigation  with  relentless  energy, 
dogged  courage,  and  keen  intelligence.  His  success  was 
complete,  and  the  extent  of  his  services  to  the  Nation  are 
pot  easily  to  be  exaggerated.  He  unearthed  a  really  appall- 


THE    PRESIDENCY  371 

ing  amount  of  corruption,  and  he  did  his  work  with  such 
absolute  thoroughness  that  the  corruption  was  completely 
eradicated. 

We  had,  of  course,  the  experience  usual  in  all  such  in 
vestigations.  At  first  there  was  popular  incredulity  and 
disbelief  that  there  was  much  behind  the  charges,  or  that 
much  could  be  unearthed.  Then  when  the  corruption  was 
shown  there  followed  a  yell  of  anger  from  all  directions, 
and  a  period  during  which  any  man  accused  was  forthwith 
held  guilty  by  the  public ;  and  violent  demands  were  made 
by  the  newspapers  for  the  prosecution  not  only  of  the  men 
who  could  be  prosecuted  with  a  fair  chance  of  securing 
conviction  and  imprisonment,  but  of  other  men  whose  mis 
conduct  had  been  such  as  to  warrant  my  removing  them 
from  office,  but  against  whom  it  was  not  possible  to  get 
the  kind  of  evidence  which  would  render  likely  conviction 
in  a  criminal  case.  Suits  were  brought  against  all  the 
officials  whom  we  thought  we  could  convict ;  and  the  public 
complained  bitterly  that  we  did  not  bring  further  suits. 
We  secured  several  convictions,  including  convictions  of 
the  most  notable  offenders.  The  trials  consumed  a  good 
deal  of  time.  Public  attention  was  attracted  to  something 
else.  Indifference  succeeded  to  excitement,  and  in  some 
subtle  way  the  juries  seemed  to  respond  to  the  indiffer 
ence.  One  of  the  worst  offenders  was  acquitted  by  a  jury ; 
whereupon  not  a  few  of  the  same  men  who  had  insisted 
that  the  Government  was  derelict  in  not  criminally  prose 
cuting  every  man  whose  misconduct  was  established  so  as 
to  make  it  necessary  to  turn  him  out  of  office,  now  turned 
round  and,  inasmuch  as  the  jury  had  not  found  this  man 
guilty  of  crime,  demanded  that  he  should  be  reinstated  in 
office!  It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  demand  was  not 
granted.  There  were  two  or  three  other  acquittals,  of  prom 
inent  outsiders.  Nevertheless  the  net  result  was  that  the 
majority  of  the  worst  offenders  were  sent  to  prison,  and 
the  remainder  dismissed  from  the  Government  service,  if 
they  were  public  officials,  and  if  they  were  not  public  officials 
at  least  so  advertised  as  to  render  it  impossible  that  they 


372    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT- AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

should  ever  again  have  dealings  with  the  Government.  The 
department  was  absolutely  cleaned  and  became  one  of  the 
very  -best  in  the  Government.  Several  Senators  came  to 
me — Mr.  Garfield  was  present  on  the  occasion — and  said 
that  they  were  glad  I  was  putting  a  stop  to  corruption,  but 
they  hoped  I  would  avoid  all  scandal ;  that  if  I  would  make 
an  example  of  some  one  man  and  then  let  the  others  quietly 
resign,  it  would  avoid  a  disturbance  which  might  hurt  the 
party.  They  were  advising  me  in  good  faith,  and  I  was 
as  courteous  as  possible  in  my  answer,  but  explained  that 
I  would  have  to  act  with  the  utmost  rigor  against  the 
offenders,  no  matter  what  the  effect  on  the  party,  and, 
moreover,  that  I  did  not  believe  it  would  hurt  the  party. 
It  did  not  hurt  the  party.  It  helped  the  party.  A  favorite 
war-cry  in  American  political  life  has  always  been,  "Turn 
the  rascals  out."  We  made  it  evident  that,  as  far  as  we 
were  concerned,  this  war-cry  was  pointless ;  for  we  turned 
our  own  rascals  out. 

There  were  important  and  successful  land  fraud  prose 
cutions  in  several  Western  States.  Probably  the  most  im 
portant  were  the  cases  prosecuted  in  Oregon  by  Francis 
J.  Heney,  with  the  assistance  of  William  J.  Burns,  a  secret 
service  agent  who  at  that  time  began  his  career  as  a  great 
detective.  It  would  be  impossible  to  overstate  the  services 
rendered  to  the  cause  of  decency  and  honesty  by  Messrs. 
Heney  and  Burns.  Mr.  Heney  was  my  close  and  intimate 
adviser  professionally  and  non-professionally,  not  only  as 
regards  putting  a  stop  to  frauds  in  the  public  lands,  but  in 
many  other  matters  of  vital  interest  to  the  Republic.  No 
man  in  the  country  has  waged  the  battle  for  National  hon 
esty  with  greater  courage  and  success,  with  more  whole 
hearted  devotion  to  the  public  good;  and  no  man  has  been 
more  traduced  and  maligned  by  the  wrong-doing  agents  and 
representatives  of  the  great  sinister  forces  of  evil.  He 
secured  the  conviction  of  various  men  of  high  political  and 
financial  standing  in  connection  with  the  Oregon  prosecu 
tions  ;  he  and  Burns  behaved  with  scrupulous  fairness  and 
propriety;  but  their  services  to  the  public  caused  them  to 


THE    PRESIDENCY  373 

incur  the  bitter  hatred  of  those  who  had  wronged  the  pub 
lic,  and  after  I  left  office  the  National  Administration  turned 
against  them.  One  of  the  most  conspicuous  of  the  men 
whom  they  had  succeeded  in  convicting  was  pardoned  by 
President  Taft — in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  presiding 
judge,  Judge  Hunt,  had  held  that  the  evidence  amply 
warranted  the  conviction,  and  had  sentenced  the  man  to 
imprisonment.  As  was  natural,  the  one  hundred  and  forty- 
six  land-fraud  defendants  in  Oregon,  who  included  the  fore 
most  machine  political  leadors  in  the  State,  furnished  the 
backbone  of  the  opposition  to  me  in  the  Presidential  contest 
of  1912.  The  opposition  rallied  behind  Messrs.  Taft  and 
LaFollette;  and  although  I  carried  the  primaries  hand 
somely,  half  of  the  delegates  elected  from  Oregon  under 
instructions  to  vote  for  me,  sided  with  my  opponents  in 
the  National  Convention — and  as  regards  some  of  them  I 
became  convinced  that  the  mainspring  of  their  motive  lay 
in  the  intrigue  for  securing  the  pardon  of  certain  of  the 
men  whose  conviction  Heney  had  secured. 

Land  fraud  and  post-office  cases  were  not  the  only  ones. 
We  were  especially  zealous  in  prosecuting  all  of  the  "  higher 
up"  offenders  in  the  realms  of  politics  and  finance  who 
swindled  on  a  large  scale.  Special  assistants  of  the  Attor 
ney-General,  such  as  Mr.  Frank  Kellogg,  of  St.  Paul,  and 
various  first-class  Federal  district  attorneys  in  different 
parts  of  the  country  secured  notable  results :  Mr.  Stimson 
and  his  assistants,  Messrs.  Wise,  Denison,  and  Frankfur 
ter,  in  New  York,  for  instance,  in  connection  with  the 
prosecution  of  the  Sugar  Trust  and  of  the  banker  Morse, 
and  of  a  great  metropolitan  newspaper  for  opening  its 
columns  to  obscene  and  immoral  advertisements;  and  in 
St.  Louis,  Messrs.  Dyer  and  Nortoni,  who,  among  other 
services,  secured  the  conviction  and  imprisonment  of  Sen 
ator  Burton,  of  Kansas;  and  in  Chicago  Mr.  Sims,  who 
raised  his  office  to  the  highest  pitch  of  efficiency,  secured 
the  conviction  of  the  banker  Walsh  and  of  the  Beef  Trust, 
and  first  broke  through  the  armor  of  the  Standard  Oil  Trust. 
It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  these  men,  and  others  like 


374    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

them,  worked  a  complete  revolution  in  the  enforcement  of 
the  Federal  laws,  and  made  their  offices  organized  legal 
machines  fit  and  ready  to  conduct  smashing  fights  for  the 
people's  rights  and  to  enforce  the  laws  in  aggressive  fash 
ion.  When  I  took  the  Presidency,  it  was  a  common  and 
bitter  saying  that  a  big  man,  a  rich  man,  could  not  be  put 
in  jail.  We  put  many  big  and  rich  men  in  jail ;  two  United 
States  Senators,  for  instance,  and  among  others  two  great 
bankers,  one  in  New  York  and  one  in  Chicago.  One  of  the 
United  States  Senators  died,  the  other  served  his  term. 
(One  of  the  bankers  was  released  from  prison  by  executive 
order  after  I  left  office.)  These  were  merely  individual 
cases  among  many  others  like  them.  Moreover,  we  were 
just  as  relentless  in  dealing  with  crimes  of  violence  among 
the  disorderly  and  brutal  classes  as  in  dealing  with  the 
crimes  of  cunning  and  fraud  of  which  certain  wealthy  men 
and  big  politicians  were  guilty.  Mr.  Sims  in  Chicago  was 
particularly  efficient  in  sending  to  the  penitentiary  num 
bers  of  the  infamous  men  who  batten  on  the  " white  slave" 
traffic,  after  July,  1908,  when  by  proclamation  I  announced 
the  adherence  of  our  Government  to  the  international  agree 
ment  for  the  suppression  of  the  traffic. 

The  views  I  then  held  and  now  hold  were  expressed  in  a 
memorandum  made  in  the  case  of  a  Negro  convicted  of  the 
rape  of  a  young  Negro  girl,  practically  a  child.  A  petition 
for  his  pardon  had  been  sent  me. 

WHITE  HOUSE,  Washington,  D.  C., 

August  8,  1904. 

The  application  for  the  commutation  of  sentence  of 
John  W.  Burley  is  denied.  This  man  committed  the  most 
hideous  crime  known  to  our  laws,  and  twice  before  he  has 
committed  crimes  of  a  similar,  though  less  horrible,  char 
acter.  In  my  judgment  there  is  no  justification  whatever 
for  paying  heed  to  the  allegations  that  he  is  not  of  sound 
mind,  allegations  made  after  the  trial  and  conviction.  No 
body  would  pretend  that  there  has  ever  been  any  such 
degree  of  mental  unsoundness  shown  as  would  make  people 


THE   PRESIDENCY  375 

even  consider  sending  him  to  an  asylum  if  he  had  not  com 
mitted  this  crime.  Under  such  circumstances  he  should 
certainly  be  esteemed  sane  enough  to  suffer  the  penalty 
for  his  monstrous  deed.  I  have  scant  sympathy  with  the 
plea  of  insanity  advanced  to  save  a  man  from  the  conse 
quences  of  crime,  when  unless  that  crime  had  been  com 
mitted  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  persuade  any  re 
sponsible  authority  to  commit  him  to  an  asylum  as  insane. 
Among  the  most  dangerous  criminals,  and  especially  among 
those  prone  to  commit  this  particular  kind  of  offense,  there 
are  plenty  of  a  temper  so  fiendish  or  so  brutal  as  to  be  in 
compatible  with  any  other  than  a  brutish  order  of  intelli 
gence  ;  but  these  men  are  nevertheless  responsible  for  their 
acts;  and  nothing  more  tends  to  encourage  crime  among 
such  men  than  the  belief  that  through  the  plea  of  insanity 
or  any  other  method  it  is  possible  for  them  to  escape  paying 
the  just  penalty  of  their  crimes.  The  crime  in  question  is 
one  to  the  existence  of  which  we  largely  owe  the  existence 
of  that  spirit  of  lawlessness  which  takes  form  in  lynching. 
It  is  a  crime  so  revolting  that  the  criminal  is  not  entitled 
to  one  particle  of  sympathy  from  any  human  being.  It  is 
essential  that  the  punishment  for  it  should  be  not  only  as 
certain,  but  as  swift  as  possible.  The  jury  in  this  case  did 
their  duty  by  recommending  the  infliction  of  the  death 
penalty.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  we  do  not  have  special 
provision  for  more  summary  dealing  with  this  type  of  cases. 
The  more  we  do  what  in  us  lies  to  secure  certain  and  swift 
justice  in  dealing  with  these  cases,  the  more  effectively  do 
we  work  against  the  growth  of  that  lynching  spirit  which 
is  so  full  of  evil  omen  for  this  people,  because  it  seeks  to 
avenge  one  infamous  crime  by  the  commission  of  another 
of  equal  infamy. 

The  application  is  denied  and  the  sentence  will  be  car 
ried  into  effect. 

(Signed)     THEODORE  EOOSEVELT. 

One  of  the  most  curious  incidents  of  lawlessness  with 
which  I  had  to  deal  affected  an  entire  State.    The  State  of 


37G    THEODORE    KOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Nevada  in  the  year  1907  was  gradually  drifting  into  utter 
governmental  impotence  and  downright  anarchy.  The  peo 
ple  were  at  heart  all  right ;  but  the  forces  of  evil  had  been 
permitted  to  get  the  upper  hand,  and  for  the  time  being  the 
decent  citizens  had  become  helpless  to  assert  themselves 
either  by  controlling  the  greedy  corporations  on  the  one 
hand  or  repressing  the  murderous  violence  of  certain  law 
less  labor  organizations  on  the  other  hand.  The  Governor 
of  the  State  wras  a  Democrat  and  a  Southern  man,  and  in 
the  abstract  a  strong  believer  in  the  doctrine  of  State's 
Eights.  But  his  experience  finally  convinced  him  that  he 
could  obtain  order  only  through  the  intervention  of  the 
National  Government;  and  then  he  went  over  too  far  and 
wished  to  have  the  National  Government  do  his  police 
work  for  him.  In  the  Rocky  Mountain  States  there  had 
existed  for  years  what  was  practically  a  condition  of  almost 
constant  war  between  the  wealthy  mine-owners  and  the 
Western  Federation  of  Miners,  at  whose  head  stood  Messrs. 
Haywood,  Pettibone,  and  Moyer,  who  were  about  that  time 
indicted  for  the  murder  of  the  Governor  of  Idaho.  Much 
that  wras  lawless,  much  that  was  indefensible,  had  been  done 
by  both  sides.  The  Legislature  of  Nevada  was  in  sympathy 
with,  or  at  least  was  afraid  of  not  expressing  sympathy  for 
Messrs.  Moyer,  Haywood,  Pettibone,  and  their  associates. 
The  State  was  practically  without  any  police,  and  the  Gov 
ernor  had  recommended  the  establishment  of  a  State  Con 
stabulary,  along  the  lines  of  the  Texas  Eangers;  but  the 
Legislature  rejected  his  request.  The  Governor  reported 
to  me  the  conditions  as  follows.  During  1907  the  Gold- 
field  mining  district  became  divided  into  two  hostile  camps. 
Half  of  the  Western  Federation  of  Miners  were  constantly 
armed,  and  arms  and  ammunition  were  purchased  and  kept 
by  the  union  as  a  body,  while  the  mine-owners  on  their  side 
retained  large  numbers  of  watchmen  and  guards  who  were 
also  armed  and  always  on  duty.  In  addition  to  these  oppos 
ing  forces  there  was,  as  the  Governor  reported,  an  unu 
sually  large  number  of  the  violent  and  criminal  element,  al 
ways  attracted  to  a  new  and  booming  mining  camp.  Under 


THE    PRESIDENCY  377 

such  conditions  the  civil  authorities  were  practically  power 
less,  and  the  Governor,  being  helpless  to  avert  civil  war, 
called  on  me  to  keep  order.  I  accordingly  threw  in  a  body 
of  regular  troops  under  General  Funston.  These  kept 
order  completely,  and  the  Governor  became  so  well  satisfied 
that  he  thought  he  would  like  to  have  them  there  perma 
nently!  This  seemed  to  me  unhealthy,  and  on  December 
28,  1907,  I  notified  him  that  while  I  would  do  my  duty,  the 
first  need  was  that  the  State  authorities  should  do  theirs, 
and  that  the  first  step  towards  this  was  the  assembling  of 
the  Legislature.  I  concluded  my  telegram :  "If  within  five 
days  from  receipt  of  this  telegram  you  shall  have  issued 
the  necessary  notice  to  convene  the  Legislature  of  Nevada, 
I  shall  continue  the  troops  during  a  period  of  three  weeks. 
If  when  the  term  of  five  days  has  elapsed  the  notice  has  not 
been  issued,  the  troops  will  be  immediately  returned  to  their 
former  stations. ' '  I  had  already  investigated  the  situation 
through  a  committee,  composed  of  the  Chief  of  the  Bureau 
of  Corporations,  Mr.  H.  K.  Smith,  the  Chief  of  the  Bureau 
of  Labor,  Mr.  C.  P.  Neill,  and  the  Comptroller  of  the  Treas 
ury,  Mr.  Lawrence  Murray.  These  men  I  could  thoroughly 
trust,  and  their  report,  which  was  not  over-favorable  to 
either  side,  had  convinced  me  that  the  only  permanent  way 
to  get  good  results  was  to  insist  on  the  people  of  the  State 
themselves  grappling  with  and  solving  their  own  troubles. 
The  Governor  summoned  the  Legislature,  it  met,  and  the 
constabulary  bill  was  passed.  The  troops  remained  in  Ne 
vada  until  time  had  been  given  for  the  State  authorities 
to  organize  their  force  so  that  violence  could  at  once  be 
checked.  Then  they  were  withdrawn. 

Nor  was  it  only  as  regards  their  own  internal  affairs  that 
I  sometimes  had  to  get  into  active  communication  with  the 
State  authorities.  There  has  always  been  a  strong  feeling 
in  California  against  the  immigration  of  Asiatic  laborers, 
whether  these  are  wage-workers  or  men  who  occupy  and  till 
the  soil.  I  believe  this  to  be  fundamentally  a  sound  and 
proper  attitude,  an  attitude  which  must  be  insisted  upon, 
and  yet  which  can  be  insisted  upon  in  such  a  manner  and 


378    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

with  such  courtesy  and  such  sense  of  mutual  fairness  and 
reciprocal  obligation  and  respect  as  not  to  give  any  just 
cause  of  offense  to  Asiatic  peoples.  In  the  present  state  of 
the  world's  progress  it  is  highly  inadvisable  that  peoples 
in  wholly  different  stages  of  civilization,  or  of  wholly  differ 
ent  types  of  civilization  even  although  both  equally  high, 
shall  be  thrown  into  intimate  contact.  This  is  especially 
undesirable  when  there  is  a  difference  of  both  race  and 
standard  of  living.  In  California  the  question  became  acute 
in  connection  with  the  admission  of  the  Japanese.  I  then 
had  and  now  have  a  hearty  admiration  for  the  Japanese 
people.  I  believe  in  them ;  I  respect  their  great  qualities ;  I 
wish  that  our  American  people  had  many  of  these  qualities. 
Japanese  and  American  students,  travelers,  scientific  and 
literary  men,  merchants  engaged  in  international  trade, 
and  the  like  can  meet  on  terms  of  entire  equality  and  should 
be  given  the  freest  access  each  to  the  country  of  the  other. 
But  the  Japanese  themselves  would  not  tolerate  the  intru 
sion  into  their  country  of  a  mass  of  Americans  who  would 
displace  Japanese  in  the  business  of  the  land.  I  think  they 
are  entirely  right  in  this  position.  I  would  be  the  first  to  ad 
mit  that  Japan  has  the  absolute  right  to  declare  on  what 
terms  foreigners  shall  be  admitted  to  work  in  her  country, 
or  to  own  land  in  her  country,  or  to  become  citizens  of  her 
country.  America  has  and  must  insist  upon  the  same  right. 
The  people  of  California  were  right  in  insisting  that  the 
Japanese  should  not  come  thither  in  mass,  that  there  should 
be  no  influx  of  laborers,  of  agricultural  workers,  or  small 
tradesmen — in  short,  no  mass  settlement  or  immigration. 
Unfortunately,  during  the  latter  part  of  my  term  as  Presi 
dent  certain  unwise  and  demagogic  agitators  in  California, 
to  show  their  disapproval  of  the  Japanese  coming  into  the 
State,  adopted  the  very  foolish  procedure  of  trying  to  pro 
vide  by  law  that  the  Japanese  children  should  not  be  al 
lowed  to  attend  the  schools  with  the  white  children,  and 
offensive  and  injurious  language  was  used  in  connection 
with  the  proposal.  The  Federal  Administration  promptly 
took  up  the  matter  with  the  California  authorities,  and  I 


THE    PRESIDENCY  379 

got  into  personal  touch  with  them.  At  rny  request  the 
Mayor  of  San  Francisco  and  other  leaders  in  the  movement 
came  on  to  see  me.  I  explained  that  the  duty  of  the  Na 
tional  Government  was  twofold:  in  the  first  place,  to  meet 
every  reasonable  wish  and  every  real  need  of  the  people  of 
California  or  any  other  State  in  dealing  with  the  people  of 
a  foreign  power;  and,  in  the  next  place,  itself  exclusively 
and  fully  to  exercise  the  right  of  dealing  with  this  foreign 
power. 

Inasmuch  as  in  the  last  resort,  including  that  last  of  all 
resorts,  war,  the  dealing  of  necessity  had  to  be  between 
the  foreign  power  and  the  National  Government,  it  was 
impossible  to  admit  that  the  doctrine  of  State  sovereignty 
could  be  invoked  in  such  a  matter.  As  soon  as  legislative 
or  other  action  in  any  State  affects  a  foreign  nation,  then 
the  affair  becomes  one  for  the  Nation,  and  the  State  should 
deal  with  the  foreign  power  purely  through  the  Nation. 

I  explained  that  I  was  in  entire  sympathy  with  the  people 
of  California  as  to  the  subject  of  immigration  of  the  Japa 
nese  in  mass ;  but  that  of  course  I  wished  to  accomplish  the 
object  they  had  in  view  in  the  way  that  would  be  most 
courteous  and  most  agreeable  to  the  feelings  of  the  Japa 
nese;  that  all  relations  between  the  two  peoples  must  be 
those  of  reciprocal  justice,  and  that  it  was  an  intolerable 
outrage  on  the  part  of  newspapers  and  public  men  to 
use  offensive  and  insulting  language  about  a  high-spirited, 
sensitive,  and  friendly  people ;  and  that  such  action  as  was 
proposed  about  the  schools  could  only  have  bad  effects,  and 
would  in  no  shape  or  way  achieve  the  purpose  that  the  Cali- 
fornians  had  in  mind.  I  also  explained  that  I  would  use 
every  resource  of  the  National  Government  to  protect  the 
Japanese  in  their  treaty  right,  and  would  count  upon  the 
State  authorities  backing  me  up  to  the  limit  in  such  action. 
In  short,  I  insisted  upon  the  two  points  (1)  that  the  Nation 
and  not  the  individual  States  must  deal  with  matters  of 
such  international  significance  and  must  treat  foreign  na 
tions  with  entire  courtesy  and  respect;  and  (2)  that  the 
Nation  would  at  once,  and  in  efficient  and  satisfactory  mai\- 


380    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ner,  take  action  tliat  would  meet  the  needs  of  California. 
I  both  asserted  the  power  of  the  Nation  and  offered  a  full 
remedy  for  the  needs  of  the  State.  This  is  the  right,  and 
the  only  right,  course.  The  worst  possible  course  in  such  a 
case  is  to  fail  to  insist  on  the  right  of  the  Nation,  to  offer 
no  action  of  the  Nation  to  remedy  what  is  wrong,  and  yet 
to  try  to  coax  the  State  not  to  do  what  it  is  mistakenly 
encouraged  to  believe  it  has  the  power  to  do,  when  no  other 
alternative  is  offered. 

After  a  good  deal  of  discussion,  we  came  to  an  entirely 
satisfactory  conclusion.  The  obnoxious  school  legislation 
was  abandoned,  and  I  secured  an  arrangement  with  Japan 
under  which  the  Japanese  themselves  prevented  any  emi 
gration  to  our  country  of  their  laboring  people,  it  being 
distinctly  understood  that  if  there  was  such  emigration  the 
United  States  would  at  once  pass  an  exclusion  law.  It  was 
of  course  infinitely  better  that  the  Japanese  should  stop 
their  own  people  from  coming  rather  than  that  we  should 
have  to  stop  them ;  but  it  was  necessary  for  us  to  hold  this 
power  in  reserve. 

Unfortunately,  after  I  left  office,  a  most  mistaken  and 
ill-advised  policy  was  pursued  towards  Japan,  combining 
irritation  and  inefficiency,  which  culminated  in  a  treaty 
under  which  we  surrendered  this  important  and  necessary 
right.  It  was  alleged  in  excuse  that  the  treaty  provided 
for  its  own  abrogation ;  but  of  course  it  is  infinitely  better 
to  have  a  treaty  under  which  the  power  to  exercise  a 
necessary  right  is  explicitly  retained  rather  than  a  treaty 
so  drawn  that  recourse  must  be  had  to  the  extreme  step  of 
abrogating  if  it  ever  becomes  necessary  to  exercise  the  right 
in  question. 

The  arrangement  we  made  worked  admirably,  and  en 
tirely  achieved  its  purpose.  No  small  part  of  our  success 
was  due  to  the  fact  that  we  succeeded  in  impressing  on  the 
Japanese  that  we  sincerely  admired  and  respected  them, 
and  desired  to  treat  them  with  the  utmost  consideration.  I 
cannot  too  strongly  express  my  indignation  with,  and  ab 
horrence  of,  reckless  public  writers  and  speakers  who,  with 


THE    PRESIDENCY  381 

coarse  and  vulgar  insolence,  insult  the  Japanese  people  and 
thereby  do  the  greatest  wrong  not  only  to  Japan  but  to  their 
own  country. 

Such  conduct  represents  the  nadir  of  underbreeding  and 
folly.  The  Japanese  are  one  of  the  great  nations  of  the 
world,  entitled  to  stand,  and  standing,  on  a  footing  of  full 
equality  with  any  nation  of  Europe  or  America.  I  have 
the  heartiest  admiration  for  them.  They  can  teach  us 
much.  Their  civilization  is  in  some  respects  higher  than 
our  own.  It  is  eminently  undesirable  that  Japanese  and 
Americans  should  attempt  to  live  together  in  masses;  any 
such  attempt  would  be  sure  to  result  disastrously,  and  the 
far-seeing  statesmen  of  both  countries  should  join  to  pre 
vent  it. 

But  this  is  not  because  either  nation  is  inferior  to  the 
other;  it  is  because  they  are  different.  The  two  peoples 
represent  two  civilizations  which,  although  in  many  re 
spects  equally  high,  are  so  totally  distinct  in  their  past 
history  that  it  is  idle  to  expect  in  one  or  two  generations 
to  overcome  this  difference.  One  civilization  is  as  old  as 
the  other ;  and  in  neither  case  is  the  line  of  cultural  descent 
coincident  with  that  of  ethnic  descent.  Unquestionably 
the  ancestors  of  the  great  majority  both  of  the  modern 
Americans  and  the  modern  Japanese  were  barbarians  in 
that  remote  past  which  saw  the  origins  of  the  cultured  peo 
ples  to  which  the  Americans  and  the  Japanese  of  to-day 
severally  trace  their  civilizations.  But  the  lines  of  develop 
ment  of  these  two  civilizations,  of  the  Orient  and  the  Occi 
dent,  have  been  separate  and  divergent  since  thousands  of 
years  before  the  Christian  era;  certainly  since  that  hoary 
eld  in  which  the  Akkadian  predecessors  of  the  Chaldean 
Semites  held  sway  in  Mesopotamia.  An  effort  to  mix  to 
gether,  out  of  hand,  the  peoples  representing  the  culminat 
ing  points  of  two  such  lines  of  divergent  cultural  devel 
opment  would  be  fraught  with  peril;  and  this,  I  repeat, 
because  the  two  are  different,  not  because  either  is  inferior 
to  the  other.  Wise  statesmen,  looking  to  the  future,  will  for 
the  present  endeavor  to  keep  the  two  nations  from  mass 


382    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

contact  and  intermingling,  precisely  because  they  wish  to 
keep  each  in  relations  of  permanent  good  will  and  friend 
ship  with  the  other. 

Exactly  what  was  done  in  the  particular  crisis  to  which 
I  refer  is  shown  in  the  following  letter  which,  after  our 
policy  had  been  successfully  put  into  execution,  I  sent  to 
the  then  Speaker  of  the  California  lower  house  of  the 
Legislature : 

THE  WHITE  HOUSE,  WASHINGTON, 

February  8,  1909. 
HON.  P.  A.  STANTON, 

Speaker  of  the  Assembly, 

Sacramento,  California : 

I  trust  there  will  be  no  misunderstanding  of  the  Federal 
Government's  attitude.  We  are  jealously  endeavoring  to 
guard  the  interests  of  California  and  of  the  entire  West  in 
accordance  with  the  desires  of  our  Western  people.  By 
friendly  agreement  with  Japan,  we  are  now  carrying  out  a 
policy  which,  while  meeting  the  interests  and  desires  of  the 
Pacific  slope,  is  yet  compatible,  not  merely  with  mutual 
self-respect,  but  with  mutual  esteem  and  admiration  be 
tween  the  Americans  and  Japanese.  The  Japanese  Govern 
ment  is  loyally  and  in  good  faith  doing  its  part  to  carry 
out  this  policy,  precisely  as  the  American  Government  is 
doing.  The  policy  aims  at  mutuality  of  obligation  and  be 
havior.  In  accordance  with  it  the  purpose  is  that  the  Japa 
nese  shall  come  here  exactly  as  Americans  go  to  Japan, 
which  is  in  effect  that  travelers,  students,  persons  engaged 
in  international  business,  men  who  sojourn  for  pleasure  or 
study,  and  the  like,  shall  have  the  freest  access  from  one 
country  to  the  other,  and  shall  be  sure  of  the  best  treatment, 
but  that  there  shall  be  no  settlement  in  mass  by  the  people 
of  either  country  in  the  other.  During  the  last  six  months 
under  this  policy  more  Japanese  have  left  the  country  than 
have  come  in,  and  the  total  number  in  the  United  States 
has  diminished  by  over  two  thousand.  These  figures  are 
absolutely  accurate  and  cannot  be  impeached.  In  other 
words,  if  the  present  policy  is  consistently  followed  and 


THE    PRESIDENCY  383 

works  as  well  in  the  future  as  it  is  now  working,  all  diffi 
culties  and  causes  of  friction  will  disappear,  while  at  the 
same  time  each  nation  will  retain  its  self-respect  and  the 
good  will  of  the  other.  But  such  a  bill  as  this  school  bill  ac 
complishes  literally  nothing  whatever  in  the  line  of  the  ob 
ject  aimed  atv  and  gives  just  and  grave  cause  for  irritation ; 
while  in  addition  the  United  States  Government  would  be 
obliged  immediately  to  take  action  in  the  Federal  courts  to 
'test  such  legislation,  as  we  hold  it  to  be  clearly  a  violation 
of  the  treaty.  On  this  point  I  refer  you  to  the  numerous 
decisions  of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court  in  regard  to 
State  laws  which  violate  treaty  obligations  of  the  United 
States.  The  legislation  would  accomplish  nothing  benefi 
cial  and  would  certainly  cause  some  mischief,  and  might 
cause  very  grave  mischief.  In  short,  the  policy  of  the  Ad 
ministration  is  to  combine  the  maximum  of  efficiency  in 
achieving  the  real  object  which  the  people  of  the  Pacific 
Slope  have  at  heart,  with  the  minimum  of  friction  and 
trouble,  while  the  misguided  men  who  advocate  such  action 
as  this  against  which  I  protest  are  following  a  policy  which 
combines  the  very  minimum  of  efficiency  with  the  maximum 
of  insult,  and  which,  while  totally  failing  to  achieve  any  real 
result  for  good,  yet  might  accomplish  an  infinity  of  harm. 
If  in  the  next  year  or  two  the  action  of  the  Federal  Govern 
ment  fails  to  achieve  what  it  is  now  achieving,  then  through 
the  further  action  of  the  President  and  Congress  it  can  be 
made  entirely  efficient.  I  am  sure  that  the  sound  judg 
ment  of  the  people  of  California  will  support  you,  Mr. 
Speaker,  in  your  effort.  Let  me  repeat  that  at  present  we 
are  actually  doing  the  very  thing  which  the  people  of  Cali 
fornia  wish  to  be  done,  and  to  upset  the  arrangement  under 
which  this  is  being  done  cannot  do  good  and  may  do  great 
harm.  If  in  the  next  year  or  two  the  figures  of  immigration 
prove  that  the  arrangement  which  has  worked  so  success 
fully  during  the  last  six  months  is  no  longer  working  suc 
cessfully,  then  there  would  be  ground  for  grievance  and  for 
the  reversal  by  the  National  Government  of  its  present 
policy.  But  at  present  the  policy  is  working  well,  and  until 


38-1    THEODORE    KOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

it  works  badly  it  would  be  a  grave  misfortune  to  change  it, 
and  when  changed  it  can  only  be  changed  effectively  by  the 
National  Government. 

THEODORE  EOOSEVELT. 

In  foreign  and  domestic  affairs  alike  the  policy  pursued 
during  my  Administration  was  simple.  In  foreign  affairs 
the  principle  from  which  we  never  deviated  was  to  have  the 
Nation  behave  toward  other  nations  precisely  as  a  strong, 
honoraWe,  and  upright  man  behaves  in  dealing  with  his 
fellow-men.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  international  law 
in  the  sense  that  there  is  municipal  law  or  law  within  a 
nation.  Within  the  nation  there  is  always  a  judge,  and  a 
policeman  who  stands  back  of  the  judge.  The  whole  system 
of  law  depends  first  upon  the  fact  that  there  is  a  judge 
competent  to  pass  judgment,  and  second  upon  the  fact  that 
there  is  some  competent  officer  whose  duty  it  is  to  carry 
out  this  judgment,  by  force  if  necessary.  In  international 
law  there  is  no  judge,  unless  the  parties  in  interest  agree 
that  one  shall  be  constituted ;  and  there  is  no  policeman  to 
carry  out  the  judge's  orders.  In  consequence,  as  yet  each 
nation  must  depend  upon  itself  for  its  own  protection.  The 
frightful  calamities  that  have  befallen  China,  solely  because 
she  has  had  no  power  of  self-defense,  ought  to  make  it  inex 
cusable  in  any  wise  American  citizen  to  pretend  to  patriotic 
purpose,  and  yet  to  fail  to  insist  that  the  United  States  shall 
keep  in  a  condition  of  ability  if  necessary  to  assert  its  rights 
with  a  strong  hand.  It  is  folly  of  the  criminal  type  for  the 
Nation  not  to  keep  up  its  navy,  not  to  fortify  its  vital  stra 
tegic  points,  and  not  to  provide  an  adequate  army  for  its 
needs.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  wicked  for  the  Nation  to 
fail  in  either  justice,  courtesy,  or  consideration  when  deal 
ing  with  any  other  power,  big  or  little.  John  Hay  was  Sec 
retary  of  State  when  I  became  President,  and  continued  to 
serve  under  me  until  his  death,  and  his  and  my  views  as  to 
the  attitude  that  the  Nation  should  take  in  foreign  affairs 
were  identical,  both  as  regards  our  duty  to  be  able  to  pro 
tect  ourselves  against  the  strong  and  as  regards  our  duty 


THE    PRESIDENCY  385 

always  to  act  not  only  justly  but  generously  toward  the 
weak. 

John  Hay  was  one  of  the  most  delightful  of  companions, 
one  of  the  most  charming  of  all  men  of  cultivation  and 
action.  Our  views  on  foreign  affairs  coincided  absolutely ; 
but,  as  was  natural  enough,  in  domestic  matters  he  felt 
much  more  conservative  than  he  did  in  the  days  when  as 
a  young  man  he  was  private  secretary  to  the  great  radical 
democratic  leader  of  the  '60 's,  Abraham  Lincoln.  He  was 
fond  of  jesting  with  me  about  my  supposedly  dangerous 
tendencies  in  favor  of  labor  against  capital.  "When  I  was 
inaugurated  on  March  4, 1905, 1  wore  a  ring  he  sent  me  the 
evening  before,  containing  the  hair  of  Abraham  Lincoln. 
This  ring  was  on  my  finger  when  the  Chief  Justice  admin 
istered  to  me  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United  States; 
I  often  thereafter  told  John  Hay  that  when  I  wore  such  a 
ring  on  such  an  occasion  I  bound  myself  more  than  ever  to 
treat  the  Constitution,  after  the  manner  of  Abraham  Lin 
coln,  as  a  document  w7hich  put  human  rights  above  property 
rights  when  the  two  conflicted.  The  last  Christmas  John 
Hay  was  alive  he  sent  me  the  manuscript  of  a  Norse  saga 
by  William  .Morris,  with  the  following  note: 

Christmas  Eve,  1904. 

DEAR  THEODORE:  In  your  quality  of  Viking  this  Norse 
saga  should  belong  to  you,  and  in  your  character  of  Enemy 
of  Property  this  Ms.  of  William  Morris  will  appeal  to  you. 
Wishing  you  ,a  Merry  Christmas  and  many  happy  years, 
I  am  yours  affectionately, 

JOHN  HAY. 

In  internal  affairs  I  cannot  say  that  I  entered  the 
Presidency  with  any  deliberately  planned  and  far-reaching 
scheme  of  social  betterment.  I  had,  however  certain  strong 
convictions ;  and  I  was  on  the  lookout  for  every  opportunity 
of  realizing  those  convictions.  I  was  bent  upon  making  the 
Government  the  most  efficient  possible  instrument  in  help 
ing  the  people  of  the  United  States  to  better  themselves  in 


386    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

every  way,  politically,  socially,  and  industrially.  I  believed 
with  all  my  heart  in  real  and  thoroughgoing  democracy, 
and  I  wished  to  make  this  democracy  industrial  as  well  as 
political,  although  I  had  only  partially  formulated  the  meth 
ods  I  believed  we  should  follow.  I  believed  in  the  people's 
rights,  and  therefore  in  National  rights  and  States'  rights 
just  exactly  to  the  degree  in  which  they  severally  secured 
popular  rights.  I  believed  in  invoking  the  National  power 
with  absolute  freedom  for  every  National  need;  and  I 
believed  that  the  Constitution  should  be  treated  as  the 
greatest  document  ever  devised  by  the  wit  of  man  to  aid  a 
people  in  exercising  every  power  necessary  for  its  own  bet 
terment,  and  not  as  a  straitjacket  cunningly  fashioned  to 
strangle  growth.  As  for  the  particular  methods  of  realiz 
ing  these  various  beliefs,  I  was  content  to  wait  and  see 
what  method  might  be  necessary  in  each  given  case  as  it 
arose;  and  I  was  certain  that  the  cases  would  arise  fast 
enough. 

As  the  time  for  the  Presidential  nomination  of  1904  drew 
near,  it  became  evident  that  I  was  strong  with  the  rank  and 
file  of  the  party,  but  that  there  was  much  opposition  to  me 
among  many  of  the  big  political  leaders,  and  especially 
among  many  of  the  Wall  Street  men.  A  group  of  these 
men  met  in  conference  to  organize  this  opposition.  It  was 
to  be  done  with  complete  secrecy.  But  such  secrets  are 
very  hard  to  .keep.  I  speedily  knew  all  about  it,  and  took 
my  measures  accordingly.  The  big  men  in  question,  who 
possessed  much  power  so  long  as  they  could  work  under 
cover,  or  so  long  as  they  were  merely  throwing  their  weight 
one  way  or  the  other  between  forces  fairly  evenly  balanced, 
were  quite  helpless  when  fighting  in  the  open  by  themselves. 
I  never  found  out  that  anything  practical  was  even  at 
tempted  by  most  of  the  men  who  took  part  in  the  confer 
ence.  Three  or  four  of  them,  however,  did  attempt  some 
thing.  The  head  of  one  big  business  corporation  attempted 
to  start  an  effort  to  control  the  delegates  from  New  Jersey, 
North  Carolina,  and  certain  Gulf  States  against  me.  The 
head  of  a  great  railway  system  made  preparations  for  a 


THE   PRESIDENCY  387 

more  ambitious  effort  looking  towards  the  control  of  the 
delegations  from  Iowa,  Kansas,  Nebraska,  Colorado,  and 
California  against  me.  He  was  a  very  powerful  man  finan 
cially,  but  his  power  politically  was  much  more  limited,  and 
he  did  not  really  understand  his  own  limitations  or  the  situ 
ation  itself,  whereas  I  did.  He  could  not  have  secured  a 
delegate  against  me  from  Iowa,  Nebraska,  or  Kansas.  In 
Colorado  and  California  he  could  have  made  a  fight,  but 
even  there  I  think  he  would  have  been  completely  beaten. 
However,  long  before  the  time  for  the  Convention  came 
round,  it  was  recognized  that  it  was  hopeless  to  make  any 
opposition  to  my  nomination.  The  effort  was  abandoned, 
and  I  was  nominated  unanimously.  Judge  Parker  was 
nominated  by  the  Democrats  against  me.  Practically  all 
the  metropolitan  newspapers  of  largest  circulation  were 
against  me ;  in  New  York  City  fifteen  out  of  every  sixteen 
copies  of  papers  issued  were  hostile  to  me.  I  won  by  a 
popular  majority  of  about  two  million  and  a  half,  and  in 
the  electoral  college  carried  330  votes  against  136.  It  was 
by  far  the  largest  popular  majority  ever  hitherto  given  any 
Presidential  candidate. 

My  opponents  during  the  campaign  had  laid  much  stress 
upon  my  supposed  personal  ambition  and  intention  to  use 
the  office  of  President  to  perpetuate  myself  in  powder.  I 
did  not  say  anything  on  the  subject  prior  to  the  election, 
as  I  did  not  wish  to  say  anything  that  could  be  construed 
into  a  promise  offered  as  a  consideration  in  order  to  secure 
votes.  But  on  election  night,  after  the  returns  were  in  I 
issued  the  following  statement:  "The  wise  custom  which 
limits  the  President  to  two  terms  regards  the  substance  and 
not  the  form,  and  under  no  circumstances  will  I  be  a  can 
didate  for  or  accept  another  nomination/' 

The  reason  for  my  choice  of  the  exact  phraseology  used 
was  twofold.  In  the  first  place,  many  of  my  supporters 
were  insisting  that,  as  I  had  served  only  three  and  a  half 
years  of  my  first  term,  coming  in  from  the  Vice-Presidency 
when  President  McKinley  was  killed,  I  had  really  had  only 
one  elective  term,  so  that  the  third  term  custom  did  not 


388    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

apply  to  me ;  and  I  wished  to  repudiate  this  suggestion.  I 
believed  then  (and  I  believe  now)  the  third  term  custom 
or  tradition  to  be  wholesome,  and,  therefore,  I  was  deter 
mined  to  regard  its  substance,  refusing  to  quibble  over  the 
words  usually  employed  to  express  it.  On  the  other  hand, 
I  did  not  wish  simply  and  specifically  to  say  that  I  would 
not  be  a  candidate  for  the  nomination  in  1908,  because  if 
I  had  specified  the  year  when  I  would  not  be  a  candidate,  it 
would  have  been  widely  accepted  as  meaning  that  I  in 
tended  to  be  a  candidate  some  other  year ;  and  I  had  no  such 
intention,  and  had  no  idea  that  I  would  ever  be  a  candidate 
again.  Certain  newspaper  men  did  ask  me  if  I  intended  to 
apply  my  prohibition  to  1912,  and  I  answered  that  I  was  not 
thinking  of  1912,  nor  of  1920,  nor  of  1940,  and  that  I  must 
decline  to  say  anything  whatever  except  what  appeared  in 
my  statement. 

The  Presidency  is  a  great  office,  and  the  power  of  the 
President  can  be  effectively  used  to  secure  a  renomination, 
especially  if  the  President  has  the  support  of  certain  great 
political  and  financial  interests.  It  is  for  this  reason,  and 
this  reason  alone,  that  the  wholesome  principle  of  continu 
ing  in  office,  so  long  as  he  is  willing  to  serve,  an  incumbent 
who  has  proved  capable,  is  not  applicable  to  the  Presidency. 
Therefore,  the  American  people  have  wisely  established  a 
custom  against  allowing  any  man  to  hold  that  office  for 
more  than  two  consecutive  terms.  But  every  shred  of  power 
which  a  President  exercises  while  in  office  vanishes  abso 
lutely  when  he  has  once  left  office.  An  ex-President  stands 
precisely  in  the  position  of  any  other  private  citizen,  and 
has  not  one  particle  more  power  to  secure  a  nomination  or 
election  than  if  he  had  never  held  the  office  at  all — indeed, 
he  probably  has  less  because  of  the  very  fact  that  he  has 
held  the  office.  Therefore  the  reasoning  on  which  the  anti- 
third  term  custom  is  based  has  no  application  whatever  to 
an  ex-President,  and  no  application  whatever  to  anything 
except  consecutive  terms.  As  a  barrier  of  precaution 
against  more  than  two  consecutive  terms  the  custom  embod 
ies  a  valuable  principle.  Applied  in  any  other  way  it  be- 


THE    PRESIDENCY  s  389 

comes  a  mere  formula,  and  like  all  formulas  a  potential 
source  of  mischievous  confusion.  Having  this  in  mind,  I 
regarded  the  custom  as  applying  practically,  if  not  just 
as  much,  to  a  President  who  had  been  seven  and  a  half 
years  in  office  as  to  one  who  had  been  eight  years  in  office, 
and  therefore,  in  the  teeth  of  a  practically  unanimous  de 
mand  from  my  own  party  that  I  accept  another  nomination, 
and  the  reasonable  certainty  that  the  nomination  would  be 
ratified  at  the  polls,  I  felt  that  the  substance  of  the  custom 
applied  to  me  in  1908.  On  the  other  hand,  it  had  no  appli 
cation  whatever  to  any  human  being  save  where  it  was 
invoked  in  the  case  of  a  man  desiring  a  third  consecutive 
term.  Having  given  such  substantial  proof  of  my  own 
regard  for  the  custom,  I  deem  it  a  duty  to  add  this  comment 
on  it.  I  believe  that  it  is  well  to  have  a  custom  of  this 
kind,  to  be  generally  observed,  but  that  it  would  be  very 
unwise  to  have  it  definitely  hardened  into  a  Constitutional 
prohibition.  It  is  not  desirable  ordinarily  that  a  man  should 
stay  in  office  twelve  consecutive  years  as  President;  but 
most  certainly  the  American  people  are  fit  to  take  care 
of  themselves,  and  stand  in  no  need  of  an  irrevocable 
self-denying  ordinance.  They  should  not  bind  themselves 
never  to  take  action  which  under  some  quite  conceivable 
circumstances  it  might  be  to  their  great  interest  to  take.  It 
is  obviously  of  the  last  importance  to  the  safety  of  a  democ 
racy  that  in  time  of  real  peril  it  should  be  able  to  command 
the  service  of  every  one  among  its  citizens  in  the  precise 
position  where  the  service  rendered  will  be  most  valuable. 
It  would  be  a  benighted  policy  in  such  event  to  disqualify 
absolutely  from  the  highest  office  a  man  who  while  holding 
it  had  actually  shown  the  highest  capacity  to  exercise  its 
powers  with  the  utmost  effect  for  the  public  defense.  If, 
for  instance,  a  tremendous  crisis  occurred  at  the  end  of  the 
second  term  of  a  man  like  Lincoln,  as  such  a  crisis  occurred 
at  the  end  of  his  first  term,  it  would  be  a  veritable  calamity 
if  the  American  people  were  forbidden  to  continue  to  use 
the  services  of  the  one  man  whom  they  knew,  and  did  not 
merely  guess,  could  carry  them  through  the  crisis.  The 


390    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

third  term  tradition  has  no  value  whatever  except  as  it  ap 
plies  to  a  third  consecutive  term.  "While  it  is  well  to  keep 
it  as  a  custom,  it  would  be  a  mark  both  of  weakness  and  un 
wisdom  for  the  American  people  to  embody  it  into  a  Con 
stitutional  provision  which  could  not  do  them  good  and  on 
some  given  occasion  might  work  real  harm. 

There  was  one  cartoon  made  while  I  was  President,  in 
which  I  appeared  incidentally,  that  was  always  a  great 
favorite  of  mine.  It  pictured  an  old  fellow  with  chin 
whiskers,  a  farmer,  in  his  shirt-sleeves,  with  his  boots  off, 
sitting  before  the  fire,  reading  the  President's  Message. 
On  his  feet  were  stockings  of  the  kind  I  have  seen  hung  up 
by  the  dozen  in  Joe  Ferris 's  store  at  Medora,  in  the  days 
when  I  used  to  come  in  to  town  and  sleep  in  one  of  the 
rooms  over  the  store.  The  title  of  the  picture  was  "His 
Favorite  Author."  This  was  the  old  fellow  whom  I  always 
used  to  keep  in  my  mind.  He  had  probably  been  in  the 
Civil  War  in  his  youth ;  he  had  worked  hard  ever  since  he 
left  the  army;  he  had  been  a  good  husband  and  father; 
he  had  brought  up  his  boys  and  girls  to  work;  he  did  not 
wish  to  do  injustice  to  any  one  else,  but  he  wanted  justice 
done  to  himself  and  to  others  like  him;  and  I  was  bound  to 
secure  that  justice  for  him  if  it  lay  in  my  power  to  do  so.1 

i  I  believe  I  realized  fairly  well  this  ambition.  I  shall  turn  to  my  enemies 
to  attest  the  truth  of  this  statement.  The  New  York  Sun,  shortly  before  the 
National  Convention  of  1904,  spoke  of  me  as  follows: 

"President  Roosevelt  holds  that  his  nomination  by  the  National  Republican 
Convention  of  1904  is  an  assured  thing.  He  makes  no  concealment  of  hia 
conviction,  and  it  is  unreservedly  shared  by  his  friends.  We  think  President 
Roosevelt  is  right. 

"There  are  strong  and  convincing  reasons  why  the  President  should  feel 
that  success  is  within  his  grasp.  He  has  used  the  opportunities  that  he  found 
or  created,  and  he  has  used  them  with  consummate  skill  and  undeniable 
Biiccess. 

"The  President  has  disarmed  all  his  enemies.  Every  weapon  they  had, 
new  or  old,  has  been  taken  from  them  and  added  to  the  now  unassailable 
Roosevelt  arsenal.  Why  should  people  wonder  that  Mr.  Bryan  clings  to  sil 
ver?  Has  not  Mr.  Roosevelt  absorbed  and  sequestered  every  vestige  of  the 
Kansas  City  platform  that  had  a  shred  of  practical  value?  Suppose  that  Mr. 
Bryan  had  been  elected  President.  What  could  he  have  accomplished  com 
pared  with  what  Mr.  Roosevelt  has  accomplished?  Will  his  most  passionate 
followers  pretend  for  one  moment  that  Mr.  Bryan  could  have  conceived,  much 
less  enforced,  any  such  pursuit  of  the  trusts  as  that  which  Mr.  Roosevelt  has 
just  brought  to  a  triumphant  issue?  Will  Mr.  Bryan  himself  intimate  that 


THE    PRESIDENCY  391 

the  Federal  courts  would  have  turned  to  his  projects  the  friendly  countenance 
which  they  have  lent  to  those  of  Mr.  Roosevelt? 

"Where  is  'government  by  injunction'  gone  to?  The  very  emptiness  of  that 
once  potent  phrase  is  beyond  description!  A  regiment  of  Bryans  could  not 
compete  with  Mr.  Roosevelt  in  harrying  the  trusts,  in  bringing  wealth  to  its 
knees,  and  in  converting  into  the  palpable  actualities  of  action  the  wildest 
dreams  of  Bryan's  campaign  orators.  He  has  outdone  them  all. 

"And  how  utterly  the  President  has  routed  the  pretensions  of  Bryan,  and  of 
the  whole  Democratic  horde  in  respect  to  organized  labor!  How  empty  were 
all  their  professions,  their  mouthings  and  their  howlings  in  the  face  of  the 
simple  and  unpretentious  achievements  of  the  President!  In  his  own  straight 
forward  fashion  he  inflicted  upon  capital  in  one  short  hour  of  the  coal  strike 
a  greater  humiliation  than  Bryan  could  have  visited  upon  it  in  a  century. 
He  is  the  leader  of  the  labor  unions  of  the  United  States.  Mr.  Roosevelt  has 
put  them  above  the  law  and  above  the  Constitution,  because  for  him  they  are 
American  people."  [This  last,  I  need  hardly  say,  is  merely  a  rhetorical 
method  of  saying  that  I  gave  the  labor  union  precisely  the  same  treatment 
as  the  corporation.] 

Senator  La  Follette,  in  the  issue  of  his  magazine  immediately  following 
my  leaving  the  Presidency  in  March,  1909,  wrote  as  follows: 

"Roosevelt  steps  from  the  stage  gracefully.  He  has  ruled  his  party  to  a 
large  extent  against  its  will.  He  has  played  a  large  part  in  the  world's  work, 
for  the  past  seven  years.  The  activities  of  his  remarkably  forceful  personality 
have  been  so  manifold  that  it  will  be  long  before  his  true  rating  will  be  fixed 
in  the  opinion  of  the  race.  He  is  said  to  think  that  the  three  great  things 
done  by  him  are  the  undertaking  of  the  construction  of  the  Panama  Canal  and 
its  rapid  and  successful  carrying  forward,  the  making  of  peace  between  Russia 
and  Japan,  and  the  sending  around  the  world  of  the  fleet. 

"These  are  important  things,  but  many  will  be  slow  to  think  them  his 
greatest  services.  The  Panama  Canal  will  surely  serve  mankind  when  in 
operation;  and  the  manner  of  organizing  this  work  seems  to  be  fine.  But  no 
one  can  yet  say  whether  this  project  will  be  a  gigantic  success  or  a  gigantic 
failure;  and  the  task  is  one  which  must,  in  the  nature  of  things,  have  been 
undertaken  and  carried  through  some  time  soon,  as  historic  periods  go,  any 
how.  The  Peace  of  Portsmouth  was  a  great  thing  to  be  responsible  for,  and 
Roosevelt's  good  offices  undoubtedly  saved  a  great  and  bloody  battle  in  Man 
churia.  But  the  war  was  fought  out,  and  the  parties  ready  to  quit,  and  there 
is  reason  to  think  that  it  was  only  when  this  situation  was  arrived  at  that 
the  good  offices  of  the  President  of  the  United  States  were,  more  or  less  in 
directly,  invited.  The  fleet's  cruise  was  a  strong  piece  of  diplomacy,  by  which 
we  informed  Japan  that  we  will  send  our  fleet  wherever  we  please  and  when 
ever  we  please.  It  worked  out  well. 

"But  none  of  these  things,  it  will  seem  to  many,  can  compare  with  some 
of  Roosevelt's  other  achievements.  Perhaps  he  is  loth  to  take  credit  as  a 
reformer,  for  he  is  prone  to  spell  the  word  with  question  marks,  and  to  speak 
disparagingly  of  'reform.' 

"But  for  all  that,  this  contemner  of  'reforms'  made  reform  respectable  in 
the  United  States,  and  this  rebuker  of  'muck-rakers'  has  been  the  chief  agent 
in  making  the  history  of  'muck-raking'  in  the  United  States  a  National  one, 
conceded  to  be  useful.  He  has  preached  from  the  White  House  many  doctrines ; 
but  among  them  he  has  left  impressed  on  the  American  mind  the  one  great 
truth  of  economic  justice  couched  in  the  pithy  and  stinging  phrase  'the  square 
deal.'  The  task  of  making  reform  respectable  in  a  commercialized  world,  and 
of  giving  the  Nation  a  slogan  in  a  phrase,  is  greater  than  the  man  who 
performed  it  is  likely  to  think. 


392    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

"And,  then,  there  is  the  great  and  statesmanlike  movement  for  the  con 
servation  of  our  National  resources,  into  which  Roosevelt  so  energetically 
threw  himself  at  a  time  when  the  Nation  as  a  whole  knew  not  that  we  are 
ruining  and  bankrupting  ourselves  as  fast  as  we  can.  This  is  probably  the 
greatest  thing  Roosevelt  did,  undoubtedly.  This  globe  is  the  capital  stock  of 
the  race.  It  is  just  so  much  coal  and  oil  and  gas.  This  may  be  economized 
or  wasted.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  phosphates  and  other  mineral  resources. 
Our  water  resources  are  immense,  and  we  are  only  just  beginning  to  use  them. 
Our  forests  have  been  destroyed;  they  must  be  restored.  Our  soils  are  being 
depleted ;  they  must  be  built  up  and  conserved. 

"These  questions  are  not  of  this  day  only  or  this  generation.  They  be 
long  all  to  the  future.  Their  consideration  requires  that  high  moral  tone 
which  regards  the  earth  as  the  home  of  a  posterity  to  whom  we  owe  a  sacred 
duty. 

"This  immense  idea  Roosevelt,  with  high  statesmanship,  dinned  into  the 
ears  of  the  Nation  until  the  Nation  heeded.  He  held  it  so  high  that  it  at 
tracted  the  attention  of  the  neighboring  nations  of  the  continent,  and  will  so 
spread  and  intensify  that  we  will  soon  see  the  world's  conferences  devoted 
to  it. 

"Nothing  can  be  greater  or  finer  than  this.  It  is  so  great  and  so  fine  that 
when  the  historian  of  the  future  shall  speak  of  Theodore  Roosevelt  he  is  likely 
to  say  that  he  did  many  notable  things,  among  them  that  of  inaugurating  the 
movement  which  finally  resulted  in  the  square  deal,  but  that  his  greatest  work 
was  inspiring  and  actually  beginning  a  world  movement  for  staying  terrestrial 
waste  and  saving  for  the  human  race  the  things  upon  which,  and  upon  which 
alone,  a  great  and  peaceful  and  progressive  and  happy  race  life  can  be 
founded. 

"What  statesman  in  all  history  has  done  anything  calling  for  go  wide  a 
view  and  for  a  purpose  more  lofty?" 


CHAPTER   XI 

THE   NATURAL  RESOURCES   OF   THE   NATION 

WHEN  Governor  of  New  York,  as  I  have  already  described, 
I  had  been  in  consultation  with  Gifford  Pinchot  and  F.  H. 
Newell,  and  had  shaped  my  recommendations  about  forestry 
largely  in  accordance  with  their  suggestions.  Like  other 
men  who  had  thought  about  the  national  future  at  all,  I  had 
been  growing  more  and  more  concerned  over  the  destruc 
tion  of  the  forests. 

While  I  had  lived  in  the  West  I  had  come  to  realize  the 
vital  need  of  irrigation  to  the  country,  and  I  had  been  both 
amused  and  irritated  by  the  attitude  of  Eastern  men  who 
obtained  from  Congress  grants  of  National  money  to  de 
velop  harbors  and  yet  fought  the  use  of  the  Nation's  power 
to  develop  the  irrigation  work  of  the  West.  Major  John 
Wesley  Powell,  the  explorer  of  the  Grand  Canon,  and  Di 
rector  of  the  Geological  Survey,  was  the  first  man  who 
fought  for  irrigation,  and  he  lived  to  see  the  Eeclamation 
Act  passed  and  construction  actually  begun.  Mr.  F.  H. 
Newell,  the  present  Director  of  the  Eeclamation  Service, 
began  his  work  as  an  assistant  hydraulic  engineer  under 
Major  Powell;  and,  unlike  Powell,  he  appreciated  the  need 
of  saving  the  forests  and  the  soil  as  well  as  the  need  of  irri 
gation.  Between  Powell  and  Newell  came,  as  Director  of 
the  Geological  Survey,  Charles  D.  Walcott,  who,  after  the 
Reclamation  Act  was  passed,  by  his  force,  pertinacity,  and 
tact,  succeeded  in  putting  the  act  into  effect  in  the  best 
possible  manner.  Senator  Francis  G.  Newlands,  of  Nevada, 
fought  hard  for  the  cause  of  reclamation  in  Congress.  He 
attempted  to  get  his  State  to  act,  and  when  that  proved 
hopeless  to  get  the  Nation  to  act ;  and  was  ably  assisted  by 
Mr.  G.  H,  Maxwell,  a  Californian,  who  had  taken  a  deep 

393 


394    THEODORE    KOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

interest  in  irrigation  matters.  Dr.  W.  J.  McGee  was  one 
of  the  leaders  in  all  the  later  stages  of  the  movement.  But 
Gifford  Pinchot  is  the  man  to  whom  the  nation  owes  most 
for  what  has  been  accomplished  as  regards  the  preserva 
tion  of  the  natural  resources  of  our  country.  He  led,  and 
indeed  during  its  most  vital  period  embodied,  the  fight  for 
the  preservation  through  use  of  our  forests.  He  played  one 
of  the  leading  parts  in  the  effort  to  make  the  National  Gov 
ernment  the  chief  instrument  in  developing  the  irrigation 
of  the  arid  West.  He  was  the  foremost  leader  in  the  great 
struggle  to  coordinate  all  our  social  and  governmental 
forces  in  the  effort  to  secure  the  adoption  of  a  rational  and 
farseeing  policy  for  securing  the  conservation  of  all  our 
national  resources.  He  was  already  in  the  Government 
service  as  head  of  the  Forestry  Bureau  when  I  became 
President;  he  continued  throughout  my  term,  not  only  as 
head  of  .the  Forest  service,  but  as  the  moving  and  directing 
spirit  in  most  of  the  conservation  work,  and  as  counsellor 
and  assistant  on  most  of  the  other  work  connected  with  the 
internal  affairs  of  the  country.  Taking  into  account  the 
varied  nature  of  the  work  he  did,  its  vital  importance  to  the 
nation  and  the  fact  that  as  regards  much  of  it  he  was  prac 
tically  breaking  new  ground,  and  taking  into  account  also 
his  tireless  energy  and  activity,  his  fearlessness,  his  com 
plete  disinterestedness,  his  single-minded  devotion  to  the  in 
terests  of  the  plain  people,  and  his  extraordinary  efficiency, 
I  believe  it  is  but  just  to  say  that  among  the  many,  many 
public  officials  who  under  my  administration  rendered  liter 
ally  invaluable  service  to  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
he,  on  the  whole,  stood  first.  A  few  months  after  I  left  the 
Presidency  he  was  removed  from  office  by  President  Taft. 
The  first  work  I  took  up  when  I  became  President  was  the 
work  of  reclamation.  Immediately  after  I  had  come  tp 
Washington,  after  the  assassination  of  President  McKinley, 
while  staying  at  the  house  of  my  sister,  Mrs.  Cowles,  before 
going  into  the  White  House,  Newell  and  Pinchot  called  upon 
me  and  laid  before  me  their  plans  for  National  irrigation  of 
the  .arid  lands  of  the  West,  and  for  the  consolidation  of 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES   OF   THE   NATION      395 

forest  work  of  the  Government  in  the  Bureau  of  Forestry. 

At  that  time  a  narrowly  legalistic  point  of  view  to 
ward  natural  resources  obtained  in  the  Departments,  and 
controlled  the  Governmental  administrative  machinery. 
Through  the  General  Land  Office  and  other  Government 
bureaus,  the  public  resources  were  being  handled  and  dis 
posed  of  in  accordance  with  the  small  considerations  of 
petty  legal  formalities,  instead  of  for  the  large  purposes 
of  constructive  development,  and  the  habit  of  deciding, 
whenever  possible,  in  favor  of  private  interests  against  the 
public  welfare  was  firmly  fixed.  It  was  as  little  customary 
to  favor  the  bona-fide  settler  and  home  builder,  as  against 
the  strict  construction  of  the  law,  as  it  was  to  use  the  law 
in  thwarting  the  operations  of  the  land  grabbers.  A  techni 
cal  compliance  with  the  letter  of  the  law  was  all  that  was 
required. 

The  idea  that  our  natural  resources  were  inexhaustible 
still  obtained,  and  there  was  as  yet  no  real  knowledge  of 
their  extent  and  condition.  The  relation  of  the  conservation 
of  natural  resources  to  the  problems  of  National  welfare  and 
National  efficiency  had  not  yet  dawned  on  the  public  mind. 
The  reclamation  of  arid  public  lands  in  the  West  was  still  a 
matter  for  private  enterprise  alone;  and  our  magnificent 
river  system,  with  its  superb  possibilities  for  public  useful 
ness,  was  dealt  with  by  the  National  Government  not  as  a 
unit,  but  as  a  disconnected  series  of  pork-barrel  problems, 
whose  only  real  interest  was  in  their  effect  on  the  reelection 
or  defeat  of  a  Congressman  here  and  there — a  theory  which, 
I  regret  to  say,  still  obtains. 

The  place  of  the  farmer  in  the  National  economy  was 
still  regarded  solely  as  that  of  a  grower  of  food  to  be  eaten 
by  others,  while  the  human  needs  and  interests  of  himself 
and  his  wife  and  children  still  remained  wholly  outside  the 
recognition  of  the  Government. 

All  the  forests  which  belonged  to  the  United  States  were 
held  and  administered  in  one  Department,  and  all  the  forest 
ers  in  Government  employ  were  in  another  Department, 
forests  and  foresters  liad  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  each 


396    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

other.  The  National  Forests  in  the  "West  (then  called  forest 
reserves)  were  wholly  inadequate  in  area  to  meet  the  pur 
poses  for  which  they  were  created,  while  the  need  for  forest 
protection  in  the  East  had  not  yet  begun  to  enter  the  public 
mind. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  things  when  Newell  and  Pin- 
chot  called  on  me.  I  was  a  warm  believer  in  reclamation 
and  in  forestry,  and,  after  listening  to  my  two  guests,  I 
asked  them  to  prepare  material  on  the  subject  for  me  to  use 
in  my  first  message  to  Congress,  of  December  3, 1901.  This 
message  laid  the  foundation  for  the  development  of  irriga 
tion  and  forestry  during  the  next  seven  and  one-half  years. 
It  set  forth  the  new  attitude  toward  the  natural  resources 
in  the  words:  "The  Forest  and  water  problems  are  per 
haps  the  most  vital  internal  problems  of  the  United  States." 

On  the  day  the  message  was  read,  a  committee  of  Western 
Senators  and  Congressmen  was  organized  to  prepare  a  Rec- 
lamation  Bill  in  accordance  with  the  recommendations.  By 
far  the  most  effective  of  the  Senators  in  drafting  and  push 
ing  the  bill,  which  became  known  by  his  name,  was  New- 
lands.  The  draft  of  the  bill  was  worked  over  by  me  and 
others  at  several  conferences  and  revised  in  important  par 
ticulars;  my  active  interference  was  necessary  to  prevent 
it  from  being  made  unworkable  by  an  undue  insistence  upon 
States  Eights,  in  accordance  with  the  efforts  of  Mr.  Mondell 
and  other  Congressmen,  who  consistently  fought  for  local 
and  private  interests  as  against  the  interests  of  the  people 
as  a  whole. 

On  June  17,  1902,  the  Reclamation  Act  was  passed.  It 
set  aside  the  proceeds  of  the  disposal  of  public  lands  for  the 
purpose  of  reclaiming  the  waste  areas  of  the  arid  West  by 
irrigating  lands  otherwise  worthless,  and  thus  creating  new 
homes  upon  the  land.  The  money  so  appropriated  was  to  be 
repaid  to  the  Government  by  the  settlers,  and  to  be  used 
again  as  a  revolving  fund  continuously  available  for  the 
work. 

The  impatience  of  the  Western  people  to  see  immediate 
results  from  the  Reclamation  Act  was  so  great  that  red  tape. 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   397 

was  disregarded,  and  the  work  was  pushed  forward  at  a 
rate  previously  unknown  in  Government  affairs.  Later, 
as  in  almost  all  such  cases,  there  followed  the  criticisms  of 
alleged  illegality  and  haste  which  are  so  easy  to  make  after 
results  have  been  accomplished  and  the  need  for  the  meas 
ures  without  which  nothing  could  have  been  done  has  gone 
by.  These  criticisms  were  in  character  precisely  the  same 
as  that  made  about  the  acquisition  of  Panama,  the  settle 
ment  of  the  anthracite  coal  strike,  the  suits  against  the  big 
trusts,  the  stopping  of  the  panic  of  1907  by  the  action  of  the 
Executive  concerning  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Com 
pany;  and,  in  short,  about  most  of  the  best  work  done 
during  my  administration. 

With  the  Eeclamation  work,  as  with  much  other  work 
under  me,  the  men  in  charge  were  given  to  understand  that 
they  must  get  into  the  water  if  they  would  learn  to  swim; 
and,  furthermore,  they  learned  to  know  that  if  they  acted 
honestly,  and  boldly  and  fearlessly  accepted  responsibility, 
I  would  stand  by  them  to  the  limit.  In  this,  as  in  every 
other  case,  in  the  end  the  boldness  of  the  action  fully  justi 
fied  itself. 

Every  item  of  the  whole  great  plan  of  Eeclamation  now 
in  effect  was  undertaken  between  1902  and  1906.  By  the 
spring  of  1909  the  work  was  an  assured  success,  and  the 
Government  had  become  fully  committed  to  its  continuance. 
The  work  of  Eeclamation  was  at  first  under  the  United 
States  Geological  Survey,  of  which  Charles  D.  Walcott  was 
at  that  time  Director.  In  the  spring  of  1908  the  United 
States  Eeclamation  Service  was  established  to  carry  it  on, 
under  the  direction  of  Frederick  Hayes  Newell,  to  whom  the 
inception  of  the  plan  was  due.  Ne well's  single-minded  de 
votion  to  this  great  task,  the  constructive  imagination  which 
enabled  him  to  conceive  it,  and  the  executive  power  and 
high  character  through  which  he  and  his  assistant,  Arthur 
P.  Davis,  built  up  a  model  service — all  these  have  made  him 
a  model  servant.  The  final  proof  of  his  merit  is  supplied  by 
the  character  and  records  of  the  men  who  later  asailed  him. 

Although  the  gross  expenditure  under  the  Eeclamation 


398    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Act  is  not  yet  as  large  as  that  for  the  Panama  Canal,  the 
engineering  obstacles  to  be  overcome  have  been  almost  as 
great,  and  the  political  impediments  many  times  greater. 
The  Eeclamation  work  had  to  be  carried  on  at  widely  sepa 
rated  points,  remote  from  railroads,  under  the  most  difficult 
pioneer  conditions.  The  twenty-eight  projects  begun  in 
the  years  1902  to  1906  contemplated  the  irrigation  of  more 
than  three  million  acres  and  the  watering  of  more  than 
thirty  thousand  farms.  Many  of  the  dams  required  for  this 
huge  task  are  higher  than  any  previously  built  anywhere  in 
the  world.  They  feed  main-line  canals  over  seven  thousand 
miles  in  total  length,  and  involve  minor  constructions,  such 
as  culverts  and  bridges,  tens  of  thousands  in  number. 

What  the  Eeclamation  Act  has  done  for  the  country  is  by 
no  means  limited  to  its  material  accomplishment.  This  Act 
and  the  results  flowing  from  it  have  helped  powerfully  to 
prove  to  the  Nation  that  it  can  handle  its  own  resources  and 
exercise  direct  and  business-like  control  over  them.  The 
population  which  the  Keclamation  Act  has  brought  into  the 
arid  West,  while  comparatively  small  when  compared  with 
that  in  the  more  closely  inhabited  East,  has  been  a  most 
effective  contribution  to  the  National  life,  for  it  has  gone 
far  to  transform  the  social  aspect  of  the  West,  making  for 
the  stability  of  the  institutions  upon  which  the  welfare  of 
the  whole  country  rests:  it  has  substituted  actual  home- 
makers,  who  have  settled  on  the  land  with  their  families,  for 
huge,  migratory  bands  of  sheep  herded  by  the  hired  shep 
herds  of  absentee  owners. 

The  recent  attacks  on  the  Eeclamation  Service,  and  on 
Mr.  Newell,  arise  in  large  part,  if  not  altogether,  from  an 
organized  effort  to  repudiate  the  obligation  of  the  settlers 
to  repay  the  Government  for  what  it  has  expended  to  re 
claim  the  land.  The  repudiation  of  any  debt  can  always  find 
supporters,  and  in  this  case  it  has  attracted  the  support 
not  only  of  certain  men  among  the  settlers  who  hope  to  be 
relieved  of  paying  what  they  owe,  but  also  of  a  variety  of 
unscrupulous  politicians,  some  highly  placed.  It  is  un 
likely  that  their  efforts  to  deprive  the  West  of  the  revolving 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   399 

Irrigation  fund  will  succeed  in  doing  anything  but  discredit 
ing  these  politicians  in  the  sight  of  all  honest  men. 

When  in  the  spring  of  1911  I  visited  the  Eoosevelt  Dam 
in  Arizona,  and  opened  the  reservoir,  I  made  a  short  speech 
to  the  assembled  people.  Among  other  things,  I  said  to  the 
engineers  present  that  in  the  name  of  all  good  citizens  I 
thanked  them  for  their  admirable  work,  as  efficient  as  it  was 
honest,  and  conducted  according  to  the  highest  standards  of 
public  service.  As  I  looked  at  the  fine,  strong,  eager  faces 
of  those  of  the  force  who  were  present,  and  thought  of  the 
similar  men  in  the  service,  in  the  higher  positions,  who  were 
absent,  and  who  were  no  less  responsible  for  the  work  done, 
I  felt  a  foreboding  that  they  would  never  receive  any  real 
recognition  for  their  achievement;  and,  only  half  humor 
ously,  I  warned  them  not  to  expect  any  credit,  or  any  satis 
faction,  except  their  own  knowledge  that  they  had  done 
well  a  first-class  job,  for  that  probably  the  only  attention 
Congress  would  ever  pay  them  would  be  to  investigate 
them.  Well,  a  year  later  a  Congressional  Committee  act 
ually  did  investigate  them.  The  investigation  was  insti 
gated  by  some  unscrupulous  local  politicians  and  by  some 
settlers  who  wished  to  be  relieved  from  paying  their  just 
obligations;  and  the  members  of  the  Committee  joined  in 
the  attack  on  as  fine  and  honorable  a  set  of  public  servants 
as  the  Government  has  ever  had;  an  attack  made  on  them 
solely  because  they  were  honorable  and  efficient  and  loyal 
to  the  interests  both  of  the  Government  and  the  settlers. 

When  I  became  President,  the  Bureau  of  Forestry  (since 
1905  the  United  States  Forest  Service)  was  a  small  but 
growing  organization,  under  Gifford  Pinchot,  occupied 
mainly  with  laying  the  foundation  of  American  forestry  by 
scientific  study  of  the  forests,  and  with  the  promotion  of 
forestry  on  private  lands.  It  contained  all  the  trained  for 
esters  in  the  Government  service,  but  had  charge  of  no  pub 
lic  timberland  whatsoever.  The  Government  forest  reserves 
of  that  day  were  in  the  care  of  a  Division  in  the  General 
Land  Office,  under  the  management  of  clerks  wholly  with 
out  knowledge  of  forestry,  few  if  any  of  whom  had  ever 


400    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

seen  a  foot  of  the  timberlands  for  which  they  were  responsi 
ble.  Thus  the  reserves  were  neither  well  protected  nor  well 
used.  There  were  no  foresters  among  the  men  who  had 
charge  of  the  National  Forests,  and  no  Government  forests 
in  charge  of  the  Government  foresters. 

In  my  first  message  to  Congress  I  strongly  recommended 
the  consolidation  of  the  forest  work  in  the  hands  of  the 
trained  men  of  the  Bureau  of  Forestry.  This  recommenda 
tion  was  repeated  in  other  messages,  but  Congress  did  not 
give  effect  to  it  until  three  years  later.  In  the  meantime, 
by  thorough  study  of  the  Western  public  timberlands,  the 
groundwork  was  laid  for  the  responsibilities  which  w^ere 
to  fall  upon  the  Bureau  of  Forestry  when  the  care  of  the 
National  Forests  came  to  be  transferred  to  it.  It  was  evi 
dent  that  trained  American  Foresters  would  be  needed  in 
considerable  numbers,  and  a  forest  school  was  established 
at  Yale  to  supply  them. 

In  1901,  at  my  suggestion  as  President,  the  Secretary  of 
the  Interior,  Mr.  Hitchcock,  made  a  formal  request  for 
technical  advice  from  the  Bureau  of  Forestry  in  handling 
the  National  Forests,  and  an  extensive  examination  of  their 
condition  and  needs  was  accordingly  taken  up.  The  same 
year  a  study  was  begun  of  the  proposed  Appalachian  Na 
tional  Forest,  the  plan  of  which,  already  formulated  at  that 
time,  has  since  been  carried  out.  A  year  later  experimental 
planting  on  the  National  Forests  was  also  begun,  and 
studies  preparatory  to  the  application  of  practical  forestry 
to  the  Indian  Eeservations  were  undertaken.  In  1903,  so 
rapidly  did  the  public  work  of  the  Bureau  of  Forestry  in 
crease,  that  the  examination  of  land  for  new  forest  reserves 
was  added  to  the  study  of  those  already  created,  the  forest 
lands  of  the  various  States  were  studied,  and  cooperation 
with  several  of  them  in  the  examination  and  handling  of 
their  forest  lands  was  undertaken.  While  these  practical 
tasks  were  pushed  forward,  a  technical  knowledge  of  Ameri 
can  Forests  was  rapidly  accumulated.  The  special  knowl 
edge  gained  was  made  public  in  printed  bulletins;  and  at 
the  same  time  the  Bureau  undertook,  through  the  news- 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   401 

paper  and  periodical  press,  to  make  all  the  people  of  the 
United  States  acquainted  with  the  needs  and  the  purposes 
of  practical  forestry.  It  is  doubtful  whether  there  has  ever 
been  elsewhere  under  the  Government  such  effective  pub 
licity — publicity  purely  in  the  interest  of  the  people — at  so 
low  a  cost.  Before  the  educational  work  of  the  Forest  Serv 
ice  was  stopped  by  the  Taft  Administration,  it  was  securing 
the  publication  of  facts  about  forestry  in  fifty  million  copies 
of  newspapers  a  month  at  a  total  expense  of  $6000  a  year. 
Not  one  cent  has  ever  been  paid  by  the  Forest  Service  to 
any  publication  of  any  kind  for  the  printing  of  this  mate 
rial.  It  was  given  out  freely,  and  published  without  cost 
because  it  was  news.  Without  this  publicity  the  Forest 
Service  could  not  have  survived  the  attacks  made  upon  it  by 
the  representatives  of  the  great  special  interests  in  Con 
gress  ;  nor  could  forestry  in  America  have  made  the  rapid 
progress  it  has. 

The  result  of  all  the  work  outlined  above  was  to  bring 
together  in  the  Bureau  of  Forestry,  by  the  end  of  1904,  the 
only  body  of  forest  experts  under  the  Government,  and 
practically  all  of  the  first-hand  information  about  the  public 
forests  which  was  then  in  existence.  In  1905,  the  obvious 
foolishness  of  continuing  to  separate  the  foresters  and  the 
forests,  reenforced  by  the  action  of  the  First  National 
Forest  Congress,  held  in  Washington,  brought  about  the 
Act  of  February  1,  1905,  which  transferred  the  National 
Forests  from  the  care  of  the  Interior  Department  to  the 
Department  of  Agriculture,  and  resulted  in  the  creation  of 
the  present  United  States  Forest  Service. 

The  men  upon  whom  the  responsibility  of  handling  some 
sixty  million  acres  of  National  Forest  lands  was  thus 
thrown  were  ready  for  the  work,  both  in  the  office  and  in 
the  field,  because  they  had  been  preparing  for  it  for  more 
than  five  years.  Without  delay  they  proceeded,  under  the 
leadership  of  Pinchot,  to  apply  to  the  new  work  the  prin 
ciples  they  had  already  formulated.  One  of  these  was  to 
open  all  the  resources  of  the  National  Forests  to  regulated 
use.  Another  was  that  of  putting  every  part  of  the  land  to 


402    THEODOBE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

that  use  in  which  it  would  best  serve  the  public.  Following 
this  principle,  the  Act  of  June  11,  1906,  was  drawn,  and  its 
passage  was  secured  from  Congress.  This  law  throws 
open  to  settlement  all  land  in  the  National  Forests  that  is 
found,  on  examination,  to  be  chiefly  valuable  for  agricul 
ture.  Hitherto  all  such  land  had  been  closed  to  the  settler. 

The  principles  thus  formulated  and  applied  may  be 
summed  up  in  the  statement  that  the  rights  of  the  public 
to  the  natural  resources  outweigh  private  rights,  and  must 
be  given  its  first  consideration.  Until  that  time,  in  dealing 
with  the  National  Forests,  and  the  public  lands  generally, 
private  rights  had  almost  uniformly  been  allowed  to  over 
balance  public  rights.  The  change  we  made  was  right,  and 
was  vitally  necessary ;  but,  of  course,  it  created  bitter  oppo 
sition  from  private  interests. 

One  of  the  principles  whose  application  was  the  source 
of  much  hostility  was  this :  It  is  better  for  the  Government 
to  help  a  poor  man  to  mak  *  a  living  for  his  family  than  to 
help  a  rich  man  make  more  profit  for  his  company.  This 
principle  was  too  sound  to  be  fought  openly.  It  is  the  kind 
of  principle  to  which  politicians  delight  to  pay  unctuous 
homage  in  words.  But  we  translated  the  words  into  deeds ; 
and  when  they  found  that  this  was  the  case,  many  rich  men, 
especially  sheep  owners,  were  stirred  to  hostility,  and  they 
used  the  Congressmen  they  controlled  to  assault  us — getting 
most  aid  from  certain  demagogues,  who  were  equally  glad 
improperly  to  denounce  rich  men  in  public  and  improperly 
to  serve  them  in  private.  The  Forest  Service  established 
and  enforced  regulations  which  favored  the  settler  as 
against  the  large  stock  owner ;  required  that  necessary  re 
ductions  in  the  stock  grazed  on  any  National  Forest  should 
bear  first  on  the  big  man,  before  the  few  head  of  the  small 
man,  upon  which  the  living  of  his  family  depended,  were 
reduced ;  and  made  grazing  in  the  National  Forests  a  help, 
instead  of  a  hindrance,  to  permanent  settlement.  As  a  re 
sult,  the  small  settlers  and  their  families  became,  on  the 
whole,  the  best  friends  the  Forest  Service  has ;  although  in 
places  their  ignorance  was  played  on  by  demagogues  to  in- 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   403 

flnence  them  against  the  policy  that  was  primarily  for  their 
own  interest. 

Another  principle  which  led  to  the  bitterest  antagonism 
of  all  was  this — whoever  (except  a  bona-fide  settler)  takes 
public  property  for  private  profit  should  pay  for  what  he 
gets.  In  the  effort  to  apply  this  principle,  the  Forest  Serv 
ice  obtained  a  decision  from  the  Attorney-General  that  it 
was  legal  to  make  the  men  who  grazed  sheep  and  cattle  on 
the  National  Forests  pay  for  what  they  got.  Accordingly, 
in  the  summer  of  1906,  for  the  first  time,  such  a  charge  was 
made;  and,  in  the  face  of  the  bitterest  opposition,  it  was 
collected. 

Up  to  the  time  the  National  Forests  were  put  under  the 
charge  of  the  Forest  Service,  the  Interior  Department  had 
made  no  effort  to  establish  public  regulation  and  control  of 
water  powers.  Upon  the  transfer,  the  Service  immediately 
began  its  fight  to  handle  the  power  resources  of  the  National 
Forests  so  as  to  prevent  speculation  and  monopoly  and  to 
yield  a  fair  return  to  the  Government.  On  May  1,  1906, 
an  Act  was  passed  granting  the  use  of  certain  power  sites 
in  Southern  California  to  the  Edison  Electric  Power  Com 
pany,  which  Act,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  Service,  limited 
the  period  of  the  permit  to  forty  years,  and  required  the 
payment  of  an  annual  rental  by  the  company,  the  same  con 
ditions  which  were  thereafter  adopted  by  the  Service  as 
the  basis  for  all  permits  for  power  development.  Then  be 
gan  a  vigorous  fight  against  the  position  of  the  Service  by 
the  water-power  interests.  The  right  to  charge  for  water- 
power  development  was,  however,  sustained  by  the  Attor 
ney-General. 

In  1907,  the  area  of  the  National  Forests  was  increased 
by  Presidential  proclamation  more  than  forty-three  million 
acres;  the  plant  necessary  for  the  full  use  of  the  Forests, 
such  as  roads,  trails,  and  telephone  lines,  began  to  be  pro 
vided  on  a  large  scale;  the  interchange  of  field  and  office 
men,  so  as  to  prevent  the  antagonism  between  them,  which 
is  so  destructive  of  efficiency  in  most  great  businesses,  was 
established  as  a  permanent  policy ;  and  the  really  effective 


404    THEODORE    BOOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

management  of  the  enormous  area  of  the  National  Forests 
began  to  be  secured. 

With  all  this  activity  in  the  field,  the  progress  of  technical 
forestry  and  popular  education  was  not  neglected.  In  1907, 
for  example,  sixty-one  publications  on  various  phases  of 
forestry,  with  a  total  of  more  than  a  million  copies,  were 
issued,  as  against  three  publications,  with  a  total  of  eighty- 
two  thousand  copies,  in  1901.  By  this  time,  also,  the  oppo 
sition  of  the  servants  of  the  special  interests  in  Congress 
to  the  Forest  Service  had  become  strongly  developed,  and 
more  time  appeared  to  be  spent  in  the  yearly  attacks  upon 
it  during  the  passage  of  the  appropriation  bills  than  on  all 
other  Government  Bureaus  put  together.  Every  year  the 
Forest  Service  had  to  fight  for  its  life. 

One  incident  in  these  attacks  is  worth  recording.  While 
the  Agricultural  Appropriation  Bill  was  passing  through 
the  Senate,  in  1907,  Senator  Fulton,  of  Oregon,  secured  an 
amendment  providing  that  the  President  could  not  set  aside 
any  additional  National  Forests  in  the  six  Northwestern 
States.  This  meant  retaining  some  sixteen  million  of  acres 
to  be  exploited  by  land  grabbers  and  by  the  representatives 
of  the  great  special  interests,  at  the  expense  of  the  public 
interest.  But  for  four  years  the  Forest  Service  had  been 
gathering  field  notes  as  to  what  forests  ought  to  be  set  aside 
in  these  States,  and  so  was  prepared  to  act.  It  was  equally 
undesirable  to  veto  the  whole  agricultural  bill,  and  to  sign 
it  with  this  amendment  effective.  Accordingly,  a  plan  to 
create  the  necessary  National  Forest  in  these  States  before 
the  Agricultural  Bill  could  be  passed  and  signed  was  laid 
before  me  by  Mr.  Pinchot.  I  approved  it.  The  necessary 
papers  were  immediately  prepared.  I  signed  the  last  proc 
lamation  a  couple  of  days  before  by  my  signature,  the  bill 
became  law;  and  when  the  friends  of  the  special  interests 
in  the  Senate  got  their  amendment  through  and  woke  up, 
they  discovered  that  sixteen  million  acres  of  timberland 
had  been  saved  for  the  people  by  putting  them  in  the  Na 
tional  Forests  before  the  land  grabbers  could  get  at  them. 
The  opponents  of  the  Forest  Service  turned  handsprings 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   405 

in  their  wrath ;  and  dire  were  their  threats  against  the  Exec 
utive;  but  the  threats  could  not  be  carried  out,  and  were 
really  only  a  tribute  to  the  efficiency  of  our  action. 

By  1908,  the  fire  prevention  work  of  the  Forest  Service 
had  become  so  successful  that  eighty-six  per  cent  of  the  fires 
that  did  occur  were  held  down  to  an  area  of  five  acres  or 
less,  and  the  timber  sales,  which  yielded  $60,000  in  1905,  in 
1908  produced  $850,000.  In  the  same  year,  in  addition 
to  the  work  of  the  National  Forests,  the  responsibility  for 
the  proper  handling  of  Indian  timberlands  was  laid  upon 
the  Forest  Service,  where  it  remained  with  great  benefit 
to  the  Indians  until  it  was  withdrawn,  as  a  part  of  the 
attack  on  the  Conservation  policy  made  after  I  left  office. 

By  March  4,  1909,  nearly  half  a  million  acres  of  agri 
cultural  land  in  the  National  Forests  had  been  opened  to 
settlement  under  the  Act  of  June  11,  1906.  The  business 
management  of  the  Forest  Service  became  so  excellent, 
thanks  to  the  remarkable  executive  capacity  of  the  Asso 
ciate  Forester,  Overton  W.  Price  (removed  after  I  left 
office),  that  it  was  declared  by  a  well-known  firm  of  business 
organizers  to  compare  favorably  with  the  best  managed  of 
the  great  private  corporations,  an  opinion  which  was  con 
firmed  by  the  report  of  a  Congressional  investigation,  and 
by  the  report  of  the  Presidential  Committee  on  Department 
method.  The  area  of  the  National  Forests  had  increased 
from  43  to  194  million  acres;  the  force  from  about  500  to 
more  than  3000.  There  was  saved  for  public  use  in  the 
National  Forests  more  Government  timberland  during  the 
seven  and  a  half  years  prior  to  March  4,  1909,  than  during 
all  previous  and  succeeding  years  put  together. 

The  idea  that  the  Executive  is  the  steward  of  the  public 
welfare  was  first  formulated  and  given  practical  effect  in 
the  Forest  Service  by  its  law  officer,  George  Woodruff. 
The  laws  were  often  insufficient,  and  it  became  well  nigh 
impossible  to  get  them  amended  in  the  public  interest  when 
once  tlie  representatives  of  privilege  in  Congress  grasped 
the  fact  that  I  would  sign  no  amendment  that  contained 
anything  not  in  the  public  interest.  It  was  necessary  to 


406    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

use  what  law  was  already  in  existence,  and  then  further  to 
supplement  it  by  Executive  action.  The  practice  of  examin 
ing  every  claim  to  public  land  before  passing  it  into  private 
ownership  offers  a  good  example  of  the  policy  in  question. 
This  practice,  which  has  since  become  general,  was  first 
applied  in  the  National  Forests.  Enormous  areas  of  valu 
able  public  timberland  were  thereby  saved  from  fraudulent 
acquisition;  more  than  250,000  acres  were  thus  saved  in  a 
single  case. 

This  theory  of  stewardship  in  the  interest  of  the  public 
was  well  illustrated  by  the  establishment  of  a  water-power 
policy.  Until  the  Forest  Service  changed  the  plan,  water- 
powers  on  the  navigable  streams,  on  the  public  domain, 
and  in  the  National  Forests  were  given  away  for  nothing, 
and  substantially  without  question,  to  whoever  asked  for 
them.  At  last,  under  the  principle  that  public  property 
should  be  paid  for  and  should  not  be  permanently  granted 
away  when  such  permanent  grant  is  avoidable,  the  Forest 
Service  established  the  policy  of  regulating  the  use  of  power 
in  the  National  Forests  in  the  public  interest  and  making  a 
charge  for  value  received.  This  was  the  beginning  of  the 
water-power  policy  now  substantially  accepted  by  the  pub 
lic,  and  doubtless  soon  to  be  enacted  into  law.  But  there 
was  at  the  outset  violent  opposition  to  it  on  the  part  of  the 
water-power  companies,  and  such  representatives  of  their 
views  in  Congress  as  Messrs.  Tawney  and  Bede. 

Many  bills  were  introduced  in  Congress  aimed,  in  one 
way  or  another,  at  relieving  the  power  companies  of  con 
trol  and  payment.  "When  these  bills  reached  me  I  refused  to 
sign  them ;  and  the  injury  to  the  public  interest  which  would 
follow  their  passage  was  brought  sharply  to  public  atten 
tion  in  my  message  of  February  26,  1908.  The  bills  made 
no  further  progress. 

Under  the  same  principle  of  stewardship,  railroads  and 
other  corporations,  which  applied  for  and  were  given  rights 
in  the  National  Forests,  were  regulated  in  the  use  of  those 
rights.  In  short,  the  public  resources  in  charge  of  the  For 
est  Service  were  handled  frankly  and  openly  for  the  public 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION  407 

welfare  under  the  clear-cut  and  clearly  set  forth  princi 
ple  that  the  public  rights  come  first  and  private  interest 
second. 

The  natural  result  of  this  new  attitude  was  the  assertion 
in  every  form  by  the  representatives  of  special  interests 
that  the  Forest  Service  was  exceeding  its  legal  powers  and 
thwarting  the  intention  of  Congress.  Suits  were  begun 
wherever  the  chance  arose.  It  is  worth  recording  that, 
in  spite  of  the  novelty  and  complexity  of  the  legal  questions 
it  had  to  face,  no  court  of  last  resort  has  ever  decided 
against  the  Forest  Service.  This  statement  includes  two 
unanimous  decisions  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States  (IT.  S.  vs.  Grimaud,  220  U.  S.,  506,  and  Light  vs. 
U.  S.,  220  U.  S.,  523). 

In  its  administration  of  the  National  Forests,  the  Forest 
Service  found  that  valuable  coal  lands  were  in  danger  of 
passing  into  private  ownership  without  adequate  money 
return  to  the  Government  and  without  safeguard  against 
monopoly;  and  that  existing  legislation  was  insufficient 
to  prevent  this.  When  this  condition  was  brought  to  my 
attention  I  withdrew  from  all  forms  of  entry  about  sixty- 
eight  million  acres  of  coal  land  in  the  United  States,  includ 
ing  Alaska.  The  refusal  of  Congress  to  act  in  the  public 
interest  was  solely  responsible  for  keeping  these  lands  from 
entry. 

The  Conservation  movement  was  a  direct  outgrowth  of 
the  forest  movement.  It  was  nothing  more  than  the  appli 
cation  to  our  other  natural  resources  of  the  principles  which 
had  been  worked  out  in  connection  with  the  forests.  With 
out  the  basis  of  public  sentiment  which  had  been  built  up 
for  the  protection  of  the  forests,  and  without  the  example  of 
public  foresight  in  the  protection  of  this,  one  of  the  great 
natural  resources,  the  Conservation  movement  would  have 
been  impossible.  The  first  formal  step  was  the  creation 
of  the  Inland  Waterways  Commission,  appointed  on  March 
14, 1907.  In  my  letter  appointing  the  Commission,  I  called 
attention  to  the  value  of  our  streams  as  great  natural  re 
sources,  and  to  the  need  for  a  progressive  plan  for  their 


408    THEODORE   ftOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

development  and  control,  and  said:  "It  is  not  possible  to 
properly  frame  so  large  a  plan  as  this  for  the  control  of  our 
rivers  without  taking  account  of  the  orderly  development 
of  other  natural  resources.  Therefore  I  ask  that  the  Inland 
Waterways  Commission  shall  consider  the  relations  of  the 
streams  to  the  use  of  all  the  great  permanent  natural 
resources  and  their  conservation  for  the  making  and 
maintenance  of  prosperous  homes." 

Over  a  year  later,  writing  on  the  report  of  the  Commis 
sion,  I  said : 

"The  preliminary  Eeport  of  the  Inland  Waterways  Com 
mission  was  excellent  in  every  way.  It  outlines  a  general 
plan  of  waterway  improvement  which  when  adopted  will 
give  assurance  that  the  improvements  will  yield  practical 
results  in  the  way  of  increased  navigation  and  water  trans 
portation.  In  every  essential  feature  the  plan  recommended 
by  the  Commission  is  new.  In  the  principle  of  coordinating 
all  uses  of  the  waters  and  treating  each  waterway  system 
as  a  unit ;  in  the  principle  of  correlating  water  traffic  with 
rail  and  other  land  traffic ;  in  the  principle  of  expert  initia 
tion  of  projects  in  accordance  with  commercial  foresight 
and  the  needs  of  a  growing  country;  and  in  the  principle 
of  cooperation  between  the  States  and  the  Federal  Govern 
ment  in  the  administration  and  use  of  waterways,  etc. ;  the 
general  plan  proposed  by  the  Commission  is  new,  and  at  the 
same  time  sane  and  simple.  The  plan  deserves  unqual 
ified  support.  I  regret  that  it  has  not  yet  been  adopted  by 
Congress,  but  I  am  confident  that  ultimately  it  will  be 
adopted." 

The  most  striking  incident  in  the  history  of  the  Commis 
sion  was  the  trip  down  the  Mississippi  Eiver  in  October, 
1907,  when,  as  President  of  the  United  States,  I  was  the 
chief  guest.  This  excursion,  with  the  meetings  which  were 
held  and  the  wide  public  attention  it  attracted,  gave  the 
development  of  our  inland  waterways  a  new  standing  in 
public  estimation.  During  the  trip  a  letter  was  prepared 
and  presented  to  me  asking  me  to  summon  a  conference 
on  the  conservation  of  natural  resources.  My  intention  to 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   409 

call  such  a  conference  was  publicly  announced  at  a  great 
meeting  at  Memphis,  Tenn. 

In  the  November  following  I  wrote  to  each  of  the  Gov 
ernors  of  the  several  States  and  to  the  Presidents  of  various 
important  National  Societies  concerned  with  natural  re 
sources,  inviting  them  to  attend  the  conference,  which  took 
place  May  13  to  15,  1908,  in  the  East  Koom  of  the  White 
House.  It  is  doubtful  whether,  except  in  time  of  war,  any 
new  idea  of  like  importance  has  ever  been  presented  to  a 
Nation  and  accepted  by  it  with  such  effectiveness  and  rapid 
ity,  as  was  the  case  with  this  Conservation  movement  when 
it  was  introduced  to  the  American  people  by  the  Confer 
ence  of  Governors.  The  first  result  was  the  unanimous 
declaration  of  the  Governors  of  all  the  States  and  Terri 
tories  upon  the  subject  of  Conservation,  a  document  which 
ought  to  be  hung  in  every  schoolhouse  throughout  the  land. 
A  further  result  wras  the  appointment  of  thirty-six  State 
Conservation  Commissions  and,  on  June  8,  1908,  of  the 
National  Conservation  Commission.  The  task  of  this  Com 
mission  was  to  prepare  an  inventory,  the  first  ever  made 
for  any  nation,  of  all  the  natural  resources  which  underlay 
its  property.  The  making  of  this  inventory  was  made  pos 
sible  by  an  Executive  order  which  placed  the  resources  of 
the  Government  Departments  at  the  command  of  the  Com 
mission,  and  made  possible  the  organization  of  subsidiary 
committees  by  w^hich  the  actual  facts  for  the  inventory  were 
prepared  and  digested.  Gifford  Pinchot  was  made  chair 
man  of  the  Commission. 

The  report  of  the  National  Conservation  Commission 
was  not  only  the  first  inventory  of  our  resources,  but  was 
unique  in  the  history  of  Government  in  the  amount  and 
variety  of  information  brought  together.  It  was  completed 
in  six  months.  It  laid  squarely  before  the  American  people 
the  essential  facts  regarding  our  natural  resources,  when 
facts  were  greatly  needed  as  the  basis  for  constructive  ac 
tion.  This  report  was  presented  to  the  Joint  Conservation 
Congress  in  December,  at  which  there  were  present  Gover 
nors  of  twenty  States,  representatives  of  twenty-two  State 


410    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Conservation  Commissions,  and  representatives  of  sixty 
National  organizations  previously  represented  at  the  White 
House  conference.  The  report  was  unanimously  approved, 
and  transmitted  to  me,  January  11,  1909.  On  January  22, 
1909, 1  transmitted  the  report  of  the  National  Conservation 
Commission  to  Congress  with  a  Special  Message,  in  which 
it  was  accurately  described  as  "one  of  the  most  fundamen 
tally  important  documents  ever  laid  before  the  American 
people." 

The  Joint  Conservation  Conference  of  December,  1908, 
suggested  to  me  the  practicability  of  holding  a  North  Amer 
ican  Conservation  Conference.  I  selected  Gifford  Pinchot 
to  convey  this  invitation  in  person  to  Lord  Grey,  Governor 
General  of  Canada;  to  Sir  Wilfrid  Laurier;  and  to  Presi 
dent  Diaz  of  Mexico ;  giving  as  reason  for  my  action,  in  the 
letter  in  which  this  invitation  was  conveyed,  the  fact  that : 
"It  is  evident  that  natural  resources  are  not  limited  by  the 
boundary  lines  which  separate  nations,  and  that  the  need 
for  conserving  them  upon  this  continent  is  as  wide  as  the 
area  Upon  which  they  exist." 

In  response  to  this  invitation,  which  included  the  colony 
of  Newfoundland,  the  Commissioners  assembled  in  the 
White  House  on  February  18,  1909.  The  American  Com 
missioners  were  Gifford  Pinchot,  Eobert  Bacon,  and  James 
E.  Garfield.  After  a  session  continuing  through  five  days, 
the  Conference  united  in  a  declaration  of  principles,  and 
suggested  to  the  President  of  the  United  States  "that  all 
nations  should  be  invited  to  join  together  in  conference  on 
the  subject  of  world  resources,  and  their  inventory,  conser 
vation,  and  wise  utilization."  Accordingly,  on  February 
19,  1909,  Eobert  Bacon,  Secretary  of  State,  addressed  to 
forty-five  nations  a  letter  of  invitation  "to  send  delegates  to 
a  conference  to  be  held  at  The  Hague  at  such  date  to  be 
found  convenient,  there  to  meet  and  consult  the  like  dele 
gates  of  the  other  countries,  with  a  view  of  considering  a 
general  plan  for  an  inventory  of  the  natural  resources  of  the 
world  and  to  devising  a  uniform  scheme  for  the  expression 
of  the  results  of  such  inventory,  to  the  end  that  there  may 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   411 

be  a  general  understanding  and  appreciation  of  the  world's 
supply  of  the  material  elements  which  underlie  the  devel 
opment  of  civilization  and  the  welfare  of  the  peoples 
of  the  earth."  After  I  left  the  White  House  the  project 
lapsed. 

Throughout  the  early  part  of  my  Administration  the 
public  land  policy  was  chiefly  directed  to  the  defense  of  the 
public  lands  against  fraud  and  theft.  Secretary  Hitchcock *s 
efforts  along  this  line  resulted  in  the  Oregon  land  fraud 
cases,  which  led  to  the  conviction  of  Senator  Mitchell,  and 
which  made  Francis  J.  Heney  known  to  the  American  peo 
ple  as  one  of  their  best  and  most  effective  servants.  These 
land  fraud  prosecutions  under  Mr.  Heney,  together  with 
the  study  of  the  public  lands  which  preceded  the  passage 
of  the  Eeclamation  Act  in  1902,  and  the  investigation  of 
land  titles  in  the  National  Forests  by  the  Forest  Service, 
all  combined  to  create  a  clearer  understanding  of  the  need 
of  land  law  reform,  and  thus  led  to  the  appointment  of  the 
Public  Lands  Commission.  This  Commission,  appointed 
by  me  on  October  22,  1903,  was  directed  to  report  to  the 
President:  "Upon  the  condition,  operation,  and  effect  of 
the  present  land  laws,  and  to  recommend  such  changes  as 
are  needed  to  effect  the  largest  practicable  disposition  of 
the  public  lands  to  actual  settlers  who  will  build  permanent 
homes  upon  them,  and  to  secure  in  permanence  the  fullest 
and  most  effective  use  of  the  resources  of  the  public  lands. " 
It  proceeded  without  loss  of  time  to  make  a  personal  study 
on  the  ground  of  public  land  problems  throughout  the  West, 
to  confer  with  the  Governors  and  other  public  men  most 
concerned,  and  to  assemble  the  information  concerning  the 
public  lands,  the  laws  and  decisions  which  governed  them, 
and  the  methods  of  defeating  or  evading  those  laws,  which 
was  already  in  existence,  but  which  remained  unformulated 
in  the  records  of  the  General  Land  Office  and  in  the  minds 
of  its  employees.  The  Public  Lands  Commission  made  its 
first  preliminary  report  on  March  7,  1904.  It  found  "that 
the  present  land  laws  do  not  fit  the  conditions  of  the  remain 
ing  public  lands, "  and  recommended  specific  changes  to 


412    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

meet  the  public  needs.  A  year  later  the  second  report  of 
the  Commission  recommended  still  further  changes,  and 
said  "The  fundamental  fact  that  characterizes  the  situation 
under  the  present  land  laws  is  this,  that  the  number  of 
patents  issued  is  increasing  out  of  all  proportion  to  the 
number  of  new  homes."  This  report  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  movement  for  Government  control  of  the  open  range, 
and  included  by  far  the  most  complete  statement  ever  made 
of  the  disposition  of  the  public  domain. 

Among  the  most  difficult  topics  considered  by  the  Public 
Land  Commission  was  that  of  the  mineral  land  laws.  This 
subject  was  referred  by  the  Commission  to  the  American 
Institute  of  Mining  Engineers,  which  reported  upon  it 
through  a  Committee.  This  Committee  made  the  very  im 
portant  recommendation,  among  others,  "that  the  Govern 
ment  of  the  United  States  should  retain  title  to  all  minerals, 
including  coal  and  oil.  in  the  lands  of  unceded  territory, 
and  lease  the  same  to  individuals  or  corporations  at  a  fixed 
rental."  The  necessity  for  this  action  has  since  come  to  be 
very  generally  recognized.  Another  recommendation,  since 
partly  carried  into  effect,  was  for  the  separation  of  the 
surface  and  the  minerals  in  lands  containing  coal  and  oil. 

Our  land  laws  have  of  recent  years  proved  inefficient ;  yet 
the  land  laws  themselves  have  not  been  so  much  to  blame 
as  the  lax,  unintelligent,  and  often  corrupt  administration 
of  these  laws.  The  appointment  on  March  4, 1907,  of  James 
E.  Garfield  as  Secretary  of  the  Interior  led  to  a  new  era  in 
the  interpretation  and  enforcement  of  the  laws  governing 
the  public  lands.  His  administration  of  the  Interior  De 
partment  was  beyond  comparison  the  best  we  have  ever 
had.  It  was  based  primarily  on  the  conception  that  it  is  as 
much  the  duty  of  public  land  officials  to  help  the  honest 
settler  get  title  to  his  claim  as  it  is  to  prevent  the  looting  of 
the  public  lands.  The  essential  fact  about  public  land 
frauds  is  not  merely  that  public  property  is  stolen,  but  that 
every  claim  fraudulently  acquired  stands  in  the  way  of  the 
making  of  a  home  or  a  livelihood  by  an  honest  man. 

As  the  study  of  the  public  land  laws  proceeded  and  their 


THii  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE   NATION      413 

administration  improved,  a  public  land  policy  was  formu 
lated  in  which  the  saving  of  the  resources  on  the  public  do 
main  for  public  use  became  the  leading  principle.  There 
followed  the  withdrawal  of  coal  lands  as  already  described, 
of  oil  lands  and  phosphate  lands,  and  finally,  just  at  the 
end  of  the  Administration,  of  water-power  sites  on  the  pub 
lic  domain.  These  withdrawals  were  made  by  the  Execu 
tive  in  order  to  afford  to  Congress  the  necessary  oppor 
tunity  to  pass  wise  laws  dealing  with  their  use  and  disposal ; 
and  the  great  crooked  special  interests  fought  them  with 
incredible  bitterness. 

Among  the  men  of  this  Nation  interested  in  the  vital 
problems  affecting  the  welfare  of  the  ordinary  hard-work 
ing  men  and  women  of  the  Nation,  there  is  none  whose  in 
terest  has  been  more  intense,  and  more  wholly  free  from 
taint  of  thought  of  self,  than  that  of  Thomas  Watson,  of 
Georgia.  While  President  I  often  discussed  with  him  the 
condition  of  women  on  the  small  farms,  and  on  the  frontier, 
the  hardship  of  their  lives  as  compared  with  those  of  the 
men,  and  the  need  for  taking  their  welfare  into  considera 
tion  in  whatever  was  done  for  the  improvement  of  life  on 
the  land.  I  also  went  over  the  matter  with  C.  S.  Barrett,  of 
Georgia,  a  leader  in  the  Southern  farmers '  movement,  and 
with  other  men,  such  as  Henry  Wallace,  Dean  L.  H.  Bailey, 
of  Cornell,  and  Kenyon  Butterfield.  One  man  from  whose 
advice  I  especially  profited  was  not  an  American,  but  an 
Irishman,  Sir  Horace  Plunkett.  In  various  conversations 
he  described  to  me  and  my  close  associates  the  reconstruc 
tion  of  farm  life  which  had  been  accomplished  by  the  Agri 
cultural  Organization  Society  of  Ireland,  of  which  he  wTas 
the  founder  and  the  controlling  force ;  and  he  discussed  the 
application  of  similar  methods  to  the  improvements  of  farm 
life  in  the  United  States.  In  the  spring  of  1908,  at  my  re 
quest,  Plunkett  conferred  on  the  subject  with  Garfield  and 
Pinchot,  and  the  latter  suggested  to  him  the  appointment 
of  a  Commission  on  Country  Life  as  a  means  for  directing 
the  attention  of  the  Nation  to  the  problems  of  the  farm,  and 
for  securing  the  necessary  knowledge  of  the  actual  condi- 


414    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

tions  of  life  in  the  open  country.  After  long  discussion  a 
plan  for  a  Country  Life  Commission  was  laid  before  me  and 
approved.  The  appointment  of  the  Commission  followed  in 
August,  1908.  In  the  letter  of  appointment  the  reasons  for 
creating  the  Commission  were  set  forth  as  follows:  "I 
doubt  if  any  other  nation  can  bear  comparison  with  our  own 
in  the  amount  of  attention  given  by  the  Government,  both 
Federal  and  State,  to  agricultural  matters.  But  practi 
cally  the  whole  of  this  effort  has  hitherto  been  directed 
toward  increasing  the  production  of  crops.  Our  attention 
has  been  concentrated  almost  exclusively  on  getting  better 
farming.  In  the  beginning  this  was  unquestionably  the  right 
thing  to  do.  The  farmer  must  first  of  all  grow  good  crops 
in  order  to  support  himself  and  his  family.  But  when  this 
has  been  secured,  the  effort  for  better  farming  should  cease 
to  stand  alone,  and  should  be  accompanied  by  the  effort  for 
better  business  and  better  living  on  the  farm.  It  is  at  least 
as  important  that  the  farmer  should  get  the  largest  possible 
return  in  money,  comfort,  and  social  advantages  from  the 
crops  he  grows,  as  that  he  should  get  the  largest  possible 
return  in  crops  from  the  land  he  farms.  Agriculture  is  not 
the  whole  of  country  life.  The  great  rural  interests  are 
human  interests,  and  good  crops  are  of  little  value  to  the 
farmer  unless  they  open  the  door  to  a  good  kind  of  life  on 
the  farm." 

The  Commission  on  Country  Life  did  work  of  capital 
importance.  By  means  of  a  widely  circulated  set  of  ques 
tions  the  Commission  informed  itself  upon  the  status  of 
country  life  throughout  the  Nation.  Its  trip  through  the 
East,  South,  and  West  brought  it  into  contact  with  large 
numbers  of  practical  farmers  and  their  wives,  secured  for 
the  Commissioners  a  most  valuable  body  of  first-hand  in 
formation,  and  laid  the  foundation  for  the  remarkable 
awakening  of  interest  in  country  life  which  has  since  taken 
place  throughout  the  Nation. 

One  of  the  most  illuminating — and  incidentally  one  of  the 
most  interesting  and  amusing — series  of  answers  sent  to 
the  Commission  was  from  a  farmer  in  Missouri.  He  stated 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   415 

that  he  had  a  wife  and  11  living  children,  he  and  his  wife 
being  each  52  years  old;  and  that  they  owned  520  acres  of 
land  without  any  mortgage  hanging  over  their  heads.  He 
had  himself  done  well,  and  his  views  as  to  why  many 
of  his  neighbors  had  done  less  well  are  entitled  to  con 
sideration.  These  views  are  expressed  in  terse  and  vigorous 
English;  they  cannot  always  be  quoted  in  full.  He  states 
that  the  farm  homes  in  his  neighborhood  are  not  as  good 
as  they  should  be  because  too  many  of  them  are  encumbered 
by  mortgages ;  that  the  schools  do  not  train  boys  and  girls 
satisfactorily  for  life  on  the  farm,  because  they  allow  them 
to  get  an  idea  in  their  heads  that  city  life  is  better,  and  that 
to  remedy  this  practical  farming  should  be  taught.  To  the 
question  whether  the  farmers  and  their  wives  in  his  neigh 
borhood  are  satisfactorily  organized,  he  answers:  "Oh, 
there  is  a  little  one-horse  grange  gang  in  our  locality,  and 
every  darned  one  thinks  they  ought  to  be  a  king. ' '  To  the 
question,  "Are  the  renters  of  farms  in  your  neighborhood 
making  a  satisfactory  living  1 ' '  he  answers :  "  No ;  because 
they  move  about  so  much  hunting  a  better  job."  To  the 
question,  "Is  the  supply  of  farm  labor  in  your  neighbor 
hood  satisfactory?"  the  answer  is:  "No;  because  the  peo 
ple  have  gone  out  of  the  baby  business";  and  when  asked 
as  to  the  remedy,  he  answers,  "Give  a  pension  to  every 
mother  who  gives  birth  to  seven  living  boys  on  American 
soil."  To  the  question,  "Are  the  conditions  surrounding 
hired  labor  on  the  farm  in  your  neighborhood  satisfactory 
to  the  hired  men?"  he  answers:  "Yes,  unless  he  is  a 
drunken  cuss,"  adding  that  he  would  like  to  blow  up  the 
stillhouses  and  root  out  whisky  and  beer.  To  the  question, 
"Are  the  sanitary  conditions  on  the  farms  in  your  neigh 
borhood  satisfactory?"  he  answers:  "No;  too  careless 
about  chicken  yards,  and  the  like,  and  poorly  covered  wells. 
In  one  well  on  neighbor's  farm  I  counted  seven  snakes  in 
the  wall  of  the  well,  and  they  used  the  water  daily :  his  wife 
dead  now  and  he  is  looking  for  another."  He  ends  by  stat 
ing  that  the  most  important  single  thing  to  be  done  for  the 
betterment  of  country  life  is  "good  roads";  but  in  his  an- 


416    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

swers  he  shows  very  clearly  that  most  important  of  all  is 
the  individual  equation  of  the  man  or  woman. 

Like  the  rest  of  the  Commissions  described  in  this  chap 
ter,  the  Country  Life  Commission  cost  the  Government  not 
one  cent,  but  laid  before  the  President  and  the  country  a 
mass  of  information  so  accurate  and  so  vitally  important 
as  to  disturb  the  serenity  of  the  advocates  of  things  as  they 
are ;  and  therefore  it  incurred  the  bitter  opposition  of  the 
reactionaries.  The  report  of  the  Country  Life  Commission 
was  transmitted  to  Congress  by  me  on  February  9,  1909. 
In  the  accompanying  message  I  asked  for  $25,000  to  print 
and  circulate  the  report  and  to  prepare  for  publication  the 
immense  amount  of  valuable  material  collected  by  the  Com 
mission  but  still  unpublished.  The  reply  made  by  Congress 
was  not  only  a  refusal  to  appropriate  the  money,  but  a 
positive  prohibition  against  continuing  the  work.  The 
Tawney  amendment  to  the  Sundry  Civil  bill  forbade  the 
President  to  appoint  any  further  Commissions  unless  spe 
cifically  authorized  by  Congress  to  do  so.  Had  this  prohi 
bition  been  enacted  earlier  and  complied  with,  it  would  have 
prevented  the  appointment  of  the  six  Roosevelt  Commis 
sions.  But  I  would  not  have  complied  with  it.  Mr.  Tawney, 
one  of  the  most  efficient  representatives  of  the  cause  of 
special  privilege  as  against  public  interest  to  be  found  in 
the  House,  was  later,  in  conjunction  with  Senator  Hale  and 
others,  able  to  induce  my  successor  to  accept  their  view.  As 
what  was  almost  my  last  official  act,  I  replied  to  Congress 
that  if  I  did  not  believe  the  Tawney  amendment  to  be  un 
constitutional  I  would  veto  the  Sundry  Civil  bill  which 
contained  it,  and  that  if  I  were  remaining  in  office  I  would 
refuse  to  obey  it.  The  memorandum  ran  in  part:  "The 
chief  object  of  this  provision,  however,  is  to  prevent  the 
Executive  repeating  what  it  has  done  within  the  last  year 
in  connection  with  the  Conservation  Commission  and  the 
Country  Life  Commission.  It  is  for  the  people  of  the  coun 
try  to  decide  whether  or  not  they  believe  in  the  work  done 
by  the  Conservation  Commission  and  by  the  Country  Life 
Commission.  .  .  . 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION   417 

"If  they  believe  in  improving  our  waterways,  in  prevent 
ing  the  waste  of  soil,  in  preserving  the  forests,  in  thrifty 
use  of  the  mineral  resources  of  the  country  for  the  nation 
as  a  whole  rather  than  merely  for  private  monopolies,  in 
working  for  the  betterment  of  the  condition  of  the  men  and 
women  who  live  on  the  farms,  then  they  will  unstintedly 
condemn  the  action  of  every  man  who  is  in  any  way  respon 
sible  for  inserting  this  provision,  and  will  support  those 
members  of  the  legislative  branch  who  opposed  its  adoption. 
I  w^ould  not  sign  the  bill  at  all  if  I  thought  the  provision  en 
tirely  effective.  But  the  Congress  cannot  prevent  the  Presi 
dent  from  seeking  advice.  Any  future  President  can  do  as 
I  have  done,  and  ask  disinterested  men  who  desire  to  serve 
the  people  to  give  this  service  free  to  the  people  through, 
these  commissions.  .  .  , 

"My  successor,  the  President-elect,  in  a  letter  to  the 
Senate  Commission  on  Appropriations,  asked  for  the  con 
tinuance  and  support  of  the  Conservation  Commission. 
The  Conservation  Commission  was  appointed  at  the  re 
quest  of  the  Governors  of  over  forty  States,  and  almost  all 
of  these  States  have  since  appointed  commissions  to  co 
operate  with  the  National  Commission.  Nearly  all  the  great 
national  organizations  concerned  with  natural  resources 
have  been  heartily  cooperating  with  the  commission. 

"With  all  these  facts  before  it,  the  Congress  has  refused 
to  pass  a  law  to  continue  and  provide  for  the  commission ; 
and  it  now  passes  a  law  with  the  purpose  of  preventing  the 
Executive  from  continuing  the  commission  at  all.  The  Ex 
ecutive,  therefore,  must  now  either  abandon  the  work  and 
reject  the  cooperation  of  the  States,  or  else  must  continue 
the  work  personally  and  through  executive  officers  whom 
he  may  select  for  that  purpose." 

The  Chamber  of  Commerce  of  Spokane,  Washington,  a 
singularly  energetic  and  far-seeing  organization,  itself  pub 
lished  the  report  which  Congress  had  thus  discreditably  re 
fused  to  publish. 

The  work  of  the  Bureau  of  Corporations,  under  Herbert 
Knox  Smith,  formed  an  important  part  of  the  Conservation 


418    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

movement  almost  from  the  beginning.  Mr.  Smith  was  a 
member  of  the  Inland  Waterways  Commission  and  of  the 
National  Conservation  Commission  and  his  Bureau  pre 
pared  material  of  importance  for  the  reports  of  both.  The 
investigation  of  standing  timber  in  the  United  States  by 
the  Bureau  of  Corporations  furnished  for  the  first  time  a 
positive  knowledge  of  the  facts.  Over  nine  hundred 
counties  in  timbered  regions  were  covered  by  the  Bureau, 
and  the  work  took  five  years.  The  most  important  facts 
ascertained  were  that  forty  years  ago  three-fourths  of  the 
standing  timber  in  the  United  States  was  publicly  owned, 
while  at  the  date  of  the  report  four-fifths  of  the  timber  in 
the  country  was  in  private  hands.  The  concentration  of 
private  ownership  had  developed  to  such  an  amazing  ex 
tent  that  about  two  hundred  holders  owned  nearly  one-half 
of  all  privately  owned  timber  in  the  United  States ;  and  of 
this  the  three  greatest  holders,  the  Southern  Pacific  Bail- 
way,  the  Northern  Pacific  Bailway,  and  the  Weyerhaeuser 
Timber  Company,  held  over  ten  per  cent.  Of  this  work. 
Mr.  Smith  says: 

"It  was  important,  indeed,  to  know  the  facts  so  that  we 
could  take  proper  action  toward  saving  the  timber  still  left 
to  the  public.  But  of  far  more  importance  was  the  light 
that  this  history  (and  the  history  of  our  other  resources) 
throws  on  the  basic  attitude,  tradition  and  governmental 
beliefs  of  the  American  people.  The  whole  standpoint  of 
the  people  toward  the  proper  aim  of  government,  toward 
the  relation  of  property  to  the  citizen,  and  the  relation  of 
property  to  the  government,  were  brought  out  first  by  this 
Conservation  work. ' ' 

The  work  of  the  Bureau  of  Corporations  as  to  water 
power  was  equally  striking.  In  addition  to  bringing  the  con 
centration  of  water-power  control  first  prominently  to  pub 
lic  attention,  through  material  furnished  for  my  message 
in  my  veto  of  the  James  Kiver  Dam  Bill,  the  work  of  the 
Bureau  showed  that  ten  great  interests  and  their  allies  held 
nearly  sixty  per  cent  of  the  developed  water  power  of  the 
United  States.  Says  Commissioner  Smith:  "Perhaps  the 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OF  THE  NATION  419 

most  important  thing  in  the  whole  work  was  its  clear  demon 
stration  of  the  fact  that  the  only  effective  place  to  control 
water  power  in  the  public  interest  is  at  the  power  sites; 
that  as  to  powers  now  owned  by  the  public  it  is  absolutely 
essential  that  the  public  shall  retain  title.  .  .  .  The  only 
way  in  which  the  public  can  get  back  to  itself  the  margin 
of  natural  advantage  in  the  wrater-power  site  is  to  rent  that 
site  at  a  rental  which,  added  to  the  cost  of  power  production 
there,  will  make  the  total  cost  of  water  power  about  the 
same  as  fuel  power,  and  then  let  the  two  sell  at  the  same 
price,  i.e.,  the  price  of  fuel  power." 

Of  the  fight  of  the  water-power  men  for  States  Eights  at 
the  St.  Paul  Conservation  Congress  in  September,  1909, 
Commissioner  Smith  says: 

"It  was  the  first  open  sign  of  the  shift  of  the  special  in 
terests  to  the  Democratic  party  for  a  logical  political  rea 
son,  namely,  because  of  the  availability  of  the  States  Eights 
idea  for  the  purposes  of  the  large  corporations.  It  marked 
openly  the  turn  of  the  tide. ' ' 

Mr.  Smith  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Inland  Water 
ways  Commission  the  overshadowing  importance  to  water 
ways  of  their  relation  with  railroad  lines,  the  fact  that  the 
bulk  of  the  traffic  is  long  distance  traffic,  that  it  cannot  pass 
over  the  whole  distance  by  water,  while  it  can  go  anywhere 
by  rail,  and  that  therefore  the  power  of  the  rail  lines  to  pro 
rate  or  not  to  pro-rate,  with  water  lines  really  determines 
the  practical  value  of  a  river  channel.  The  controlling  value 
of  terminals  and  the  fact  that  out  of  fifty  of  our  leading 
ports,  over  half  the  active  water  frontage  in  twenty-one 
ports  was  controlled  by  the  railroads,  was  also  brought  to 
the  Commission's  attention,  and  reports  of  great  value  were 
prepared  both  for  the  Inland  Waterways  Commission  and 
for  the  National  Conservation  Commission.  In  addition  to 
developing  the  basic  facts  about  the  available  timber  sup 
ply,  about  water-ways,  water  power,  and  iron  ore,  Mr. 
Smith  helped  to  develop  and  drive  into  the  public  conscience 
the  idea  that  the  people  ought  to  retain  title  to  our  natural 
resources  and  handle  them  by  the  leasing  system. 


420    THEODOKE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

The  things  accomplished  that  have  been  enumerated 
above  were  of  immediate  consequence  to  the  economic  well- 
being  of  our  people.  In  addition  certain  things  were  done 
of  which  the  economic  bearing  was  more  remote,  but  which 
bore  directly  upon  our  welfare,  because  they  add  to  the 
beauty  of  living  and  therefore  to  the  joy  of  life.  Securing 
a  great  artist,  Saint-Gaudens,  to  give  us  the  most  beautiful 
coinage  since  the  decay  of  Hellenistic  Greece  was  one  such 
act.  In  this  case  I  had  power  myself  to  direct  the  Mint  to 
employ  Saint-Gaudens.  The  first,  and  most  beautiful,  of  his 
coins  were  issued  in  thousands  before  Congress  assembled 
or  could  intervene ;  and  a  great  and  permanent  improvement 
was  made  in  the  beauty  of  the  coinage.  In  the  same  way, 
on  the  advice  and  suggestion  of  Frank  Millet,  we  got  some 
really  capital  medals  by  sculptors  of  the  first  rank.  Simi 
larly,  the  new  buildings  in  AVashington  were  erected  and 
placed  in  proper  relation  to  one  another,  on  plans  provided 
by  the  best  architects  and  landscape  architects.  I  also  ap 
pointed  a  Fine  Arts  Council,  an  unpaid  body  of  the  best 
architects,  painters,  and  sculptors  in  the  country,  to  advise 
the  Government  as  to  the  erection  and  decoration  of  all  new 
buildings.  The  " pork-barrel' '  Senators  and  Congressmen 
felt  for  this  body  an  instinctive,  and  perhaps  from  their 
standpoint  a  natural,  hostility;  and  my  successor  a  couple 
of  months  after  taking  office  revoked  the  appointment  and 
disbanded  the  Council. 

Even  more  important  was  the  taking  of  steps  to  preserve 
from  destruction  beautiful  and  wonderful  wild  creatures 
whose  existence  was  threatened  by  greed  and  \vantonness. 
During  the  seven  and  a  half  years  closing  on  March  4, 1909, 
more  was  accomplished  for  the  protection  of  wild  life  in  the 
United  States  than  during  all  the  previous  years,  excepting 
only  the  creation  of  the  Yellowstone  National  Park.  The 
record  includes  the  creation  of  five  National  Parks — Crater 
Lake,  Oregon ;  Wind  Cave,  South  Dakota ;  Platt,  Oklahoma ; 
Sully  Hill,  North  Dakota,  and  Mesa  Verde,  Colorado ;  four 
big  game  refuges  in  Oklahoma,  Arizona,  Montana,  and 
Washington;  fifty-one  bird  reservations;  and  the  enactment 


THE  NATURAL  RESOURCES  OP  THE  NATION   421 

of  laws  for  the  protection  of  wild  life  in  Alaska,  the  District 
of  Columbia,  and  on  National  bird  reserves.  These  meas 
ures  may  be  briefly  enumerated  as  follows : 

The  enactment  of  the  first  game  laws  for  the  Territory  of 
Alaska  in  1902  and  1908,  resulting  in  the  regulation  of  the 
export  of  heads  and  trophies  of  big  game  and  putting  an 
end  to  the  slaughter  of  deer  for  hides  along  the  southern 
coast  of  the  Territory. 

The  securing  in  1902  of  the  first  appropriation  for  the 
preservation  of  buffalo  and  the  establishment  in  the  Yellow 
stone  National  Park  of  the  first  and  now  the  largest  herd  of 
buffalo  belonging  to  the  Government. 

The  passage  of  the  Act  of  January  24,  1905,  creating  the 
"Wichita  Game  Preserves,  the  first  of  the  National  game  pre 
serves.  In  1907, 12,000  acres  of  this  preserve  were  inclosed 
with  a  woven  wire  fence  for  the  reception  of  the  herd 
of  fifteen  buffalo  donated  by  the  New  York  Zoological 
Society. 

The  passage  of  the  Act  of  June  29, 1906,  providing  for  the 
establishment  of  the  Grand  Canon  Game  Preserve  of  Ari 
zona,  now  comprising  1,492,928  acres. 

The  passage  of  the  National  Monuments  Act  of  June  8, 
1906,  under  which  a  number  of  objects  of  scientific  interest 
have  been  preserved  for  all  time.  Among  the  Monuments 
created  are  Muir  Woods,  Pinnacles  National  Monument 
in  California  and  the  Mount  Olympus  National  Monument, 
"Washington,  which  form  important  refuges  for  game. 

The  passage  of  the  Act  of  June  30, 1906,  regulating  shoot 
ing  in  the  District  of  Columbia  and  making  three-fourths  of 
the  environs  of  the  National  Capital  within  the  District  in 
effect  a  National  Refuge. 

The  passage  of  the  Act  of  May  23,  1908,  providing  for 
the  establishment  of  the  National  Bison  Range  in  Montana. 
This  range  comprises  about  18,000  acres  of  land  formerly 
in  the  Flathead  Indian  Reservation,  on  which  is  now  es 
tablished  a  herd  of  eighty  buffalo,  a  nucleus  of  which  was 
donated  to  the  Government  by  the  American  Bison  Society. 

The  issue  of  the  Order  protecting  birds  on)  the  Niobrara 


422    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Military  Keservation,  Nebraska,  in  1908,  making  this  entire 
reservation  in  effect  a  bird  reservation. 

The  establishment  by  Executive  Order  between  March  14, 
1903,  and  March  4, 1909,  of  fifty-one  National  Bird  Reserva 
tions  distributed  in  seventeen  States  and  Territories  from 
Porto  Kico  to  Hawaii  and  Alaska.  The  creation  of  these 
reservations  at  once  placed  the  United  States  in  the  front 
rank  in  the  world  work  of  bird  protection.  Among  these 
reservations  are  the  celebrated  Pelican  Island  rookery  in 
Indian  River,  Florida;  The  Mosquito  Inlet  Reservation, 
Florida,  the  northernmost  home  of  the  manatee ;  the  exten 
sive  marshes  bordering  Klamath  and  Malheur  Lakes  in 
Oregon,  formerly  the  scene  of  slaughter  of  ducks  for  market 
and  ruthless  destruction  of  plume  birds  for  the  millinery 
trade ;  the  Tortugas  Key,  Florida,  where,  in  connection  with 
the  Carnegie  Institute,  experiments  have  been  made  on  the 
homing  instinct  of  birds;  and  the  great  bird  colonies  on 
Laysan  and  sister  islets  in  Hawaii,  some  of  the  greatest 
colonies  of  sea  birds  in  the  world. 


CHAPTER  XII 

THE   BIG  STICK  AND  THE   SQUARE   DEAL 

of  the  vital  questions  with  which  as  President  I  had  to 
deal  was  the  attitude  of  the  Nation  toward  the  great  cor 
porations.  Men  who  understand  and  practice  the  deep  un 
derlying  philosophy  of  the  Lincoln  school  of  American  po 
litical  thought  are  necessarily  Hamiltonian  in  their  belief 
in  a  strong  and  efficient  National  Government  and  Jeffer- 
sonian  in  their  belief  in  the  people  as  the  ultimate  authority, 
and  in  the  welfare  of  the  people  as  the  end  of  Government. 
The  men  who  first  applied  the  extreme  Democratic  theory 
in  American  life  were,  like  Jefferson,  ultra  individualists, 
for  at  that  time  what  was  demanded  by  our  people  was  the 
largest  liberty  for  the  individual.  During  the  century  that 
had  elapsed  since  Jefferson  became  President  the  need  had 
been  exactly  reversed.  There  had  been  in  our  country  a  riot 
of  individualistic  materialism,  under  which  complete  free 
dom  for  the  individual — that  ancient  license  which  Presi 
dent  Wilson  a  century  after  the  term  was  excusable  has 
called  the  "New"  Freedom — turned  out  in  practice  to  mean 
perfect  freedom  for  the  strong  to  wrong  the  weak.  The 
total  absence  of  governmental  control  had  led  to  a  porten 
tous  growth  in  the  financial  and  industrial  world  both  of 
natural  individuals  and  of  artificial  individuals — that  is, 
corporations.  In  no  other  country  in  the  world  had  such 
enormous  fortunes  been  gained.  In  no  other  country  in  the 
world  was  such  power  held  by  the  men  who  had  gained 
these  fortunes;  and  these  men  almost  always  worked 
through,  and  by  means  of,  the  giant  corporations  which  they 
controlled.  The  power  of  the  mighty  industrial  overlords 
of  the  country  had  increased  with  giant  strides,  while  the 
methods  of  controlling  them,  or  checking  abuses  by  them*. 

423 


424    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

on  the  part  of  the  people,  through  the  Government,  re 
mained  archaic  and  therefore  practically  impotent.  The 
courts,  not  unnaturally,  but  most  regrettably,  and  to  the 
grave  detriment  of  the  people  and  of  their  own  standing, 
had  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  been  on  the  whole  the  agents 
of  reaction,  and  by  conflicting  decisions  which,  however,  in 
their  sum  were  hostile  to  the  interests  of  the  people,  had 
left  both  the  nation  and  the  several  States  well-nigh  impo 
tent  to  deal  with  the  great  business  combinations.  Some 
times  they  forbade  the  Nation  to  interfere,  because  such 
interference  trespassed  on  the  rights  of  the  States;  some 
times  they  forbade  the  States  to  interfere  (and  often  they 
were  wise  in  this),  because  to  do  so  would  trespass  on  the 
rights  of  the  Nation ;  but  always,  or  well-nigh  always,  their 
action  was  negative  action  against  the  interests  of  the  peo 
ple,  ingeniously  devised  to  limit  their  power  against  wrong, 
instead  of  affirmative  action  giving  to  the  people  power  to 
right  wrong.  They  had  rendered  these  decisions  sometimes 
as  upholders  of  property  rights  against  human  rights,  being 
especially  zealous  in  securing  the  rights  of  the  very  men 
who  were  most  competent  to  take  care  of  themselves;  and 
sometimes  in  the  name  of  liberty,  in  the  name  of  the  so- 
called  "new  freedom,"  in  reality  the  old,  old  "freedom," 
which  secured  to  the  powerful  the  freedom  to  prey  on  the 
poor  and  the  helpless. 

One  of  the  main  troubles  was  the  fact  that  the  men  who 
saw  the  evils  and  who  tried  to  remedy  them  attempted  to 
wrork  in  two  wholly  different  ways,  and  the  great  majority 
of  them  in  a  way  that  offered  little  promise  of  real  better 
ment.  They  tried  (by  the  Sherman  law  method)  to  bolster 
up  an  individualism  already  proved  to  be  both  futile  and 
mischievous ;  to  remedy  by  more  individualism  the  concen 
tration  that  was  the  inevitable  result  of  the  already  exist 
ing  individualism.  They  saw  the  evil  done  by  the  big  com 
binations,  and  sought  to  remedy  it  by  destroying  them  and 
restoring  the  country  to  the  economic  conditions  of  the 
middle  of  the  nineteenth  century.  This  was  a  hopeless  ef 
fort,  and  those  who  went  into  it,  although  they  regarded 


THE   BIG   STICK   AND   THE   SQUARE   DEAL      425 

themselves  as  radical  progressives,  really  represented  a 
form  of  sincere  rural  toryism.  They  confounded  monopolies 
with  big  business  combinations,  and  in  the  effort  to  pro 
hibit  both  alike,  instead  of  where  possible  prohibiting  one 
and  drastically  controlling  the  other,  they  succeeded  merely 
in  preventing  any  effective  control  of  either. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  few  men  recognized  that  corpora 
tions  and  combinations  had  become  indispensable  in  the 
business  world,  that  it  was  folly  to  try  to  prohibit  them,  but 
that  it  was  also  folly  to  leave  them  without  thoroughgoing 
control.  These  men  realized  that  the  doctrines  of  the  old 
laissez-faire  economists,  of  the  believers  in  unlimited  com 
petition,  unlimited  individualism,  were  in  the  actual  state 
of  affairs  false  and  mischievous.  They  realized  that  the 
Government  must  now  interfere  to  protect  labor,  to  subordi 
nate  the  big  corporation  to  the  public  welfare,  and  to 
shackle  cunning  and  fraud  exactly  as  centuries  before  it 
had  interfered  to  shackle  the  physical  force  which  does 
wrong  by  violence. 

The  big  reactionaries  of  the  business  world  and  their  allies 
and  instruments  among  politicians  and  newspaper  editors 
took  advantage  of  this  division  of  opinion,  and  especially 
of  the  fact  that  most  of  their  opponents  were  on  the  wrong 
path;  and  fought  to  keep  matters  absolutely  unchanged. 
These  men  demanded  for  themselves  an  immunity  from 
governmental  control  which,  if  granted,  would  have  been 
as  wicked  and  as  foolish  as  immunity  to  the  barons  of  the 
twelfth  century.  Many  of  them  were  evil  men.  Many  others 
were  just  as  good  men  as  were  some  of  these  same  barons ; 
but  they  were  as  utterly  unable  as  any  medieval  castle- 
owner  to  understand  what  the  public  interest  really  was. 
There  have  been  aristocracies  which  have  played  a  great 
and  beneficent  part  at  stages  in  the  growth  of  mankind ;  but 
we  had  come  to  the  stage  where  for  our  people  what  was 
needed  was  a  real  democracy;  and  of  all  forms  of  tyranny 
the  least  attractive  and  the  most  vulgar  is  the  tyranny  of 
mere  wealth,  the  tyranny  of  a  plutocracy. 

When  I  became  President,  the  question  as  to  the  method 


426    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

by  which  the  United  States  Government  was  to  control  the 
corporations  was  not  yet  important.  The  absolutely  vital 
question  was  whether  the  Government  had  power  to  control 
them  at  all.  This  question  had  not  yet  been  decided  in  favor 
of  the  United  States  Government.  It  was  useless  to  dis 
cuss  methods  of  controlling  big  business  by  the  National 
Government  until  it  was  definitely  settled  that  the  National 
Government  had  the  power  to  control  it.  A  decision  of  the 
Supreme  Court  had,  with  seeming  definiteness,  settled  that 
the  National  Government  had  not  the  power. 

This  decision  I  caused  to  be  annulled  by  the  court  that 
had  rendered  it;  and  the  present  power  of  the  National 
Government  to  deal  effectively  with  the  trusts  is  due  solely 
to  the  success  of  the  Administration  in  securing  this  re 
versal  of  its  former  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court. 

The  Constitution  was  formed  very  largely  because  it 
had  become  imperative  to  give  to  some  central  authority 
the  power  to  regulate  and  control  interstate  commerce. 
At  that  time  when  corporations  were  in  their  infancy  and 
big  combinations  unknown,  there  was  no  difficulty  in  exer 
cising  the  power  granted.  In  theory,  the  right  of  the  Na 
tion  to  exercise  this  power  continued  unquestioned.  But 
changing  conditions  obscured  the  matter  in  the  sight  of  the 
people  as  a  whole ;  and  the  conscious  and  the  unconscious 
advocates  of  an  unlimited  and  uncontrollable  capitalism 
gradually  secured  the  whittling  away  of  the  National  power 
to  exercise  this  theoretical  right  of  control  until  it  practi 
cally  vanished.  After  the  Civil  War,  with  the  portentous 
growth  of  industrial  combinations  in  this  country,  came  a 
period  of  reactionary  decisions  by  the  courts  which,  as  re 
gards  corporations,  culminated  in  what  is  known  as  the 
Knight  case. 

The  Sherman  Anti-Trust  Law  was  enacted  in  1890  be 
cause  the  formation  of  the  Tobacco  Trust  and  the  Sugar 
Trust,  the  only  two  great  trusts  then  in  the  country  (aside 
from  the  Standard  Oil  Trust,  which  was  a  gradual  growth), 
had  awakened  a  popular  demand  for  legislation  to  destroy 
monopoly  and  curb  industrial  combinations.  This  demand 


THE    BIG   STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      427 

the  Anti-Trust  Law  was  intended  to  satisfy.  The  Admin 
istrations  of  Mr.  Harrison  and  Mr.  Cleveland  evidently 
construed  this  law  as  prohibiting  such  combinations  in  the 
future,  not  as  condemning  those  which  had  been  formed 
prior  to  its  enactment.  In  1895,  however,  the  Sugar  Trust, 
whose  output  originally  was  about  fifty-five  per  cent  of  all 
sugar  produced  in  the  United  States,  obtained  control  of 
three  other  companies  in  Philadelphia  by  exchanging  its 
stock  for  theirs,  and  thus  increased  its  business  until  it  con 
trolled  ninety-eight  per  cent  of  the  entire  product.  Under 
Cleveland,  the  Government  brought  proceedings  against 
the  Sugar  Trust,  invoking  the  Anti-Trust  Law,  to  set  aside 
the  acquisition  of  these  corporations.  The  test  case  was  on 
the  absorption  of  the  Knight  Company.1  The  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States,  with  but  one  dissenting  vote, 
held  adversely  to  the  Government.  They  took  the  ground 
that  the  power  conferred  by  the  Constitution  to  regulate 
and  control  interstate  commerce  did  not  extend  to  the  pro 
duction  or  manufacture  of  commodities  within  a  State,  and 
that  nothing  in  the  Sherman  Anti-Trust  Law  prohibited  a 
corporation  from  acquiring  all  the  stock  of  other  corpora 
tions  through  exchange  of  its  stock  for  theirs,  such  ex 
change  not  being  " commerce"  in  the  opinion  of  the  Court, 
even  though  by  such  acquisition  the  corporation  was  enabled 
to  control  the  entire  production  of  a  commodity  that  was  a 
necessary  of  life.  The  effect  of  this  decision  was  not  merely 
the  absolute  nullification  of  the  Anti-Trust  Law,  so  far  as 
industrial  corporations  were  concerned,  but  was  also  in 
effect  a  declaration  that,  under  the  Constitution,  the  Na 
tional  Government  could  pass  no  law  really  effective  for 
the  destruction  or  control  of  such  combinations. 

This  decision  left  the  National  Government,  that  is,  the 
people  of  the  Nation,  practically  helpless  to  deal  with  the 
large  combinations  of  modern  business.  The  courts  in 
other  cases  asserted  the  power  of  the  Federal  Government 
to  enforce  the  Anti-Trust  Law  so  far  as  transportation 

i  The  case  is  known  in  the  law  books  as  U.  S,  vs,  E,  C.  Knight,  156  U.  S.. 
Sept.,  p.  1. 


428    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

rates  by  railways  engaged  in  interstate  commerce  were  con 
cerned.  But  so  long  as  the  trusts  were  free  to  control  the 
production  of  commodities  without  interference  from  the 
General  Government,  they  were  well  content  to  let  the  trans 
portation  of  commodities  take  care  of  itself — especially  as 
the  law  against  rebates  was  at  that  time  a  dead  letter ;  and 
the  Court  by  its  decision  in  the  Knight  case  had  interdicted 
any  interference  by  the  President  or  by  Congress  with  the 
production  of  commodities.  It  was  on  the  authority  of  this 
case  that  practically  all  the  big  trusts  in  the  United  States, 
excepting  those  already  mentioned,  were  formed.  Usually 
they  were  organized  as  " holding"  companies,  each  one 
acquiring  control  of  its  constituent  corporations  by  ex 
changing  its  stock  for  theirs,  an  operation  which  the  Su 
preme  Court  had  thus  decided  could  not  be  prohibited, 
controlled,  regulated,  or  even  questioned  by  the  Federal 
Government. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  our  laws  when  I  acceded  to 
the  Presidency.  Just  before  my  accession,  a  small  group 
of  financiers  desiring  to  profit  by  the  governmental  impo 
tence  to  Which  we  had  been  reduced  by  the  Knight  deci 
sion,  had  arranged  to  take  control  of  practically  the  entire 
railway  system  in  the  Northwest — possibly  as  the  first  step 
toward  controlling  the  entire  railway  system  of  the  coun 
try.  This  control  of  the  Northwestern  railway  systems  was 
to  be  effected  by  organizing  a  new  "holding"  company,  and 
exchanging  its  stock  against  the  stock  of  the  various  corpo 
rations  engaged  in  railway  transportation  throughout  that 
vast  territory,  exactly  as  the  Sugar  Trust  had  acquired 
control  of  the  Knight  company  and  other  concerns.  This 
company  was  called  the  Northern  Securities  Company.  Not 
long  after  I  became  President,  on  the  advice  of  the  Attor 
ney-General,  Mr.  Knox,  and  through  him,  I  ordered  pro 
ceedings  to  be  instituted  for  the  dissolution  of  the  company. 
As  far  as  could  be  told  by  their  utterances  at  the  time, 
among  all  the  great  lawyers  in  the  United  States  Mr.  Knox 
was  the  only  one  who  believed  that  this  action  could  be  sus 
tained.  The  defense  was  based  expressly  on  the  ground 


THE    BIG    STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL,      429 

that  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Knight  case  had  explicitly 
sanctioned  the  formation  of  such  a  company  as  the  Northern 
Securities  Company.  The  representatives  of  privilege  inti 
mated,  and  sometimes  asserted  outright,  that  in  directing 
the  action  to  be  brought  I  had  shown  a  lack  of  respect  for 
the  Supreme  Court,  which  had  already  decided  the  question 
at  issue  by  a  vote  of  eight  to  one.  Mr.  Justice  White,  then 
on  the  Court  and  now  Chief  Justice,  set  forth  the  position 
that  the  two  cases  were  in  principle  identical  with  incon 
trovertible  logic.  In  giving  the  views  of  the  dissenting 
minority  on  the  action  I  had  brought,  he  said : 

"The  parallel  between  the  two  cases  [the  Knight  case 
and  the  Northern  Securities  case]  is  complete.  The  one  cor 
poration  acquired  the  stock  of  other  and  competing  corpo 
rations  in  exchange  for  its  own.  It  was  conceded  for  the 
purposes  of  the  ease,  that  in  doing  so  monopoly  had  been 
brought  about  in  the  refining  of  sugar,  that  the  sugar  to 
be  produced  was  likely  to  become  the  subject  of  interstate 
commerce,  and  indeed  that  part  of  it  would  certainly  become 
so.  But  the  power  of  Congress  was  decided  not  to  extend 
to  the  subject,  because  the  ownership  of  the  stock  in  the 
corporations  was  not  itself  commerce/'1 

Mr.  Justice  White  was  entirely  correct  in  this  statement. 
The  cases  were  parallel.  It  was  necessary  to  reverse  the 
Knight  case  in  the  interests  of  the  people  against  monopoly 
and  privilege  just  as  it  had  been  necessary  to  reverse  the 
Dred  Scott  case  in  the  interest  of  the  people  against  slavery 
and  privilege ;  just  as  later  it  became  necessary  to  reverse 
the  New  York  Bakeshop  case  in  the  interest  of  the  people 
against  that  form  of  monopolistic  privilege  which  put 
human  rights  below  property  rights  where  wage-workers 
were  concerned. 

By  a  vote  of  five  to  four  the  Supreme  Court  reversed  its 
decision  in  the  Knight  case,  and  in  the  Northern  Securities 
case  sustained  the  Government.  The  power  to  deal  with 
industrial  monopoly  and  suppress  it  and  to  control  and  reg 
ulate  combinations,  of  which  the  Knight  case  had  deprived 

i  Northern  Securities  Company  et  al.  vs.  U.  S.,  156  U.  S.,  Sept.,  pp.  391-2. 


430    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

tlie  Federal  Government,  was  thus  restored  to  it  by  the 
Northern  Securities  case.  After  this  later  decision  was 
rendered,  suits  were  brought  by  my  direction  against  the 
American  Tobacco  Company  and  the  Standard  Oil  Com 
pany.  Both  were  adjudged  criminal  conspiracies,  and  their 
dissolution  ordered.  The  Knight  case  was  finally  over 
thrown.  The  vicious  doctrine  it  embodied  no  longer  re 
mains  as  an  obstacle  to  obstruct  the  pathway  of  justice  when 
it  assails  monopoly.  Messrs.  Knox,  Moody,  and  Bonaparte, 
who  successively  occupied  the  position  of  Attorney-General 
under  me,  were  profound  lawyers  and  fearless  and  able 
men;  and  they  completely  established  the  newer  and  more 
wholesome  doctrine  under  which  the  Federal  Government 
may  now  deal  with  monopolistic  combinations  and  con 
spiracies. 

The  decisions  rendered  in  these  various  cases  brought 
under  my  direction  constitute  the  entire  authority  upon 
which  any  action  must  rest  that  seeks  through  the  exercise 
of  national  power  to  curb  monopolistic  control.  The  men 
who  organized  and  directed  the  Northern  Securities  Com 
pany  were  also  the  controlling  forces  in  the  Steel  Corpora 
tion,  which  has  since  been  prosecuted  under  the  act.  The 
proceedings  against  the  Sugar  Trust  for  corruption  in  con 
nection  with  the  New  York  Custom  House  are  sufficiently 
interesting  to  be  considered  separately. 

From  the  standpoint  of  giving  complete  control  to  the 
National  Government  over  big  corporations  engaged  in 
inter-State  business,  it  would  be  impossible  to  over-esti 
mate  the  importance  of  the  Northern  Securities  decision 
and  of  the  decisions  afterwards  rendered  in  line  with  it  in 
connection  with  the  other  trusts  whose  dissolution  was 
ordered.  The  success  of  the  Northern  Securities  case  defi 
nitely  established  the  power  of  the  Government  to  deal 
with  all  great  corporations.  Without  this  success  the  Na 
tional  Government  must  have  remained  in  the  impotence  to 
which  it  had  been  reduced  by  the  Knight  decision  as  regards 
the  most  important  of  its  internal  functions.  But  our  suc 
cess  in  establishing  the  power  of  the  National  Government 


THE    BIG    STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      431 

to  curb  monopolies  did  not  establish  the  right  method  of 
exercising  that  power.  "We  had  gained  the  power.  We  had 
not  devised  the  proper  method  of  exercising  it. 

Monopolies  can,  although  in  rather  cumbrous  fashion, 
be  broken  up  by  law  suits.  Great  business  combinations, 
however,  cannot  possibly  be  made  useful  instead  of  noxious 
industrial  agencies  merely  by  law  suits,  and  especially  by 
law  suits  supposed  to  be  carried  on  for  their  destruction  and 
not  for  their  control  and  regulation.  I  at  once  began  to 
urge  upon  Congress  the  need  of  laws  supplementing  the 
Anti-Trust  Law — for  this  law  struck  at  all  big  business, 
good  and  bad,  alike,  and  as  the  event  proved  was  very  in 
efficient  in  checking  bad  big  business,  and  yet  was  a  constant 
threat  against  decent  business  men.  I  strongly  urged  the 
inauguration  of  a  system  of  thoroughgoing  and  drastic 
Governmental  regulation  and  control  over  all  big  business 
combinations  engaged  in  inter-State  industry. 

Here  I  was  able  to  accomplish  only  a  small  part  of  what 
I  desired  to  accomplish.  I  was  opposed  both  by  the  foolish 
radicals  who  desired  to  break  up  all  big  business,  with  the 
impossible  ideal  of  returning  to  mid-nineteenth  century 
industrial  conditions ;  and  also  by  the  great  privileged  inter 
ests  themselves,  who  used  these  ordinarily — but  sometimes 
not  entirely — well-meaning  " stool  pigeon  progressives" 
to  further  their  own  cause.  The  worst  representatives  of 
big  business  encouraged  the  outcry  for  the  total  abolition 
of  big  business,  because  they  knew  that  they  could  not  be 
hurt  in  this  way,  and  that  such  an  outcry  distracted  the 
attention  of  the  public  from  the  really  efficient  method  of 
controlling  and  supervising  them,  in  just  but  masterly 
fashion,  which  was  advocated  by  the  sane  representatives 
of  reform.  However,  we  succeeded  in  making  a  good  be 
ginning  by  securing  the  passage  of  a  law  creating  the  De 
partment  of  Commerce  and  Labor,  and  with  it  the  erection 
of  the  Bureau  of  Corporations.  The  first  head  of  the  De 
partment  of  Commerce  and  Labor  was  Mr.  Cortelyou,  later 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  He  was  succeeded  by  Mr.  Oscar 
Straus.  The  first  head  of  the  Bureau  of  Corporations  was 


432    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Mr.  Garfield,  who  was  succeeded  by  Mr.  Herbert  Knox 
Smith.  No  four  better  public  servants  from  the  standpoint 
of  the  people  as  a  whole  could  have  been  found. 

The  Standard  Oil  Company  took  the  lead  in  opposing  all 
this  legislation.  This  was  natural,  for  it  had  been  the  worst 
offender  in  the  amassing  of  enormous  fortunes  by  improper 
methods  of  all  kinds,  at  the  expense  of  business  rivals  and 
of  the  public,  including  the  corruption  of  public  servants. 
If  any  man  thinks  this  condemnation  extreme,  I  refer  him 
to  the  language  officially  used  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
nation  in  its  decision  against  the  Standard  Oil  Company. 
Through  their  counsel,  and  by  direct  telegrams  and  letters 
to  Senators  and  Congressmen  from  various  heads  of  the 
Standard  Oil  organization,  they  did  their  best  to  kill  the  bill 
providing  for  the  Bureau  of  Corporations.  I  got  hold  of 
one  or  two  of  these  telegrams  and  letters,  however,  and 
promptly  published  them;  and,  as  generally  happens  in 
such  a  case,  the  men  who  were  all-powerful  as  long  as  they 
could  work  in  secret  and  behind  closed  doors  became  power 
less  as  soon  as  they  were  forced  into  the  open.  The  bill 
went  through  without  further  difficulty. 

The  true  way  of  dealing  with  monopoly  is  to  prevent  it 
by  administrative  action  before  it  grows  so  powerful  that 
even  when  courts  condemn  it  they  shrink  from  destroying 
it.  The  Supreme  Court  in  the  Tobacco  and  Standard  Oil 
cases,  for  instance,  used  very  vigorous  language  in  con 
demning  these  trusts ;  but  the  net  result  of  the  decision  was 
of  positive  advantage  to  the  wrongdoers,  and  this  has 
tended  to  bring  the  whole  body  of  our  law  into  disrepute  in 
quarters  where  it  is  of  the  very. highest  importance  that  the 
law  be  held  in  respect  and  even  in  reverence.  My  effort 
was  to  secure  the  creation  of  a  Federal  Commission  which 
should  neither  excuse  nor  tolerate  monopoly,  but  prevent 
it  when  possible  and  uproot  it  when  discovered ;  and  which 
should  in  addition  effectively  control  and  regulate  all  big 
combinations,  and  should  give  honest  business  certainty  as 
to  what  the  law  was  and  security  as  long  as  the  law  was 
obeyed.  Such  a  Commission  would  furnish  a  steady  expert 


THE    BIG   STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      433 

control,  a  control  adapted  to  the  problem;  and  dissolution 
is  neither  control  nor  regulation,  but  is  purely  negative; 
and  negative  remedies  are  of  little  permanent  avail.  Such 
a  Commission  would  have  complete  power  to  examine  into 
every  big  corporation  engaged  or  proposing  to  engage  in 
business  between  the  States.  It  would  have  the  power  to 
discriminate  sharply  between  corporations  that  are  doing 
well  and  those  that  are  doing  ill ;  and  the  distinction  between 
those  who  do  well  and  those  who  do  ill  would  be  defined 
in  terms  so  clear  and  unmistakable  that  no  one  could  misap 
prehend  them.  Where  a  company  is  found  seeking  its  prof 
its  through  serving  the  community  by  stimulating  produc 
tion,  lowering  prices  or  improving  service,  while  scrupu 
lously  respecting  the  rights  of  others  (including  its  rivals, 
its  employees,  its  customers,  and  the  general  public),  and 
strictly  obeying  the  law,  then  no  matter  how  large  its  capi 
tal,  or  how  great  the  volume  of  its  business  it  would  be  en 
couraged  to  still  more  abundant  production,  or  better  serv 
ice,  by  the  fullest  protection  that  the  Government  could 
afford  it.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  corporation  were  found 
seeking  profit  through  injury  or  oppression  of  the  com 
munity,  by  restricting  production  through  trick  or  device, 
by  plot  or  conspiracy  against  competitors,  or  by  oppres 
sion  of  wage-workers,  and  then  extorting  high  prices  for 
the  commodity  it  had  made  artificially  scarce,  it  would  be 
prevented  from  organizing  if  its  nefarious  purpose  could 
be  discovered  in  time,  or  pursued  and  suppressed  by  all  the 
power  of  Government  whenever  found  in  actual  operation. 
Such  a  commission,  with  the  power  I  advocate,  would  put 
a  stop  to  abuses  of  big  corporations  and  small  corporations 
alike ;  it  would  draw  the  line  on  conduct  and  not  on  size ;  it 
would  destroy  monopoly,  and  make  the  biggest  business 
man  in  the  country  conform  squarely  to  the  principles  laid 
down  by  the  American  people,  while  at  the  same  time  giving- 
fair  play  to  the  little  man  and  certainty  of  knowledge  as  to 
what  was  wrong  and  what  was  right  both  to  big  man  and 
little  man. 
Although  under  the  decision  of  the  courts  the  National 


434    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Government  had  power  over  the  railways,  I  found,  when  I 
became  President,  that  this  power  was  either  not  exercised 
at  all  or  exercised  with  utter  inefficiency.  The  law  against 
rebates  was  a  dead  letter.  All  the  unscrupulous  railway 
men  had  been  allowed  to  violate  it  with  impunity;  and 
because  of  this,  as  was  inevitable,  the  scrupulous  and  decent 
railway  men  had  been  forced  to  violate  it  themselves,  under 
penalty  of  being  beaten  by  their  less  scrupulous  rivals.  It 
was  not  the  fault  of  these  decent  railway  men.  It  was  the 
fault  of  the  Government. 

Thanks  to  a  first-class  railway  man,  Paul  Morton  of  the 
Santa  Fe,  son  of  Mr.  Cleveland's  Secretary  of  Agriculture, 
I  was  able  completely  to  stop  the  practice.  Mr.  Morton 
volunteered  to  aid  the  Government  in  abolishing  rebates. 
He  frankly  stated  that  he,  like  every  one  else,  had  been 
guilty  in  the  matter;  but  he  insisted  that  he  uttered  the 
sentiments  of  the  decent  railway  men  of  the  country  when 
he  said  that  he  hoped  the  practice  would  be  stopped,  and 
that  if  I  would  really  stop  it,  and  not  merely  make  believe 
to  stop  it,  he  would  give  the  testimony  which  would  put  into 
the  hands  of  the  Government  the  power  to  put  a  complete 
check  to  the  practice.  Accordingly  he  testified,  and  on  the 
information  which  he  gave  us  we  were  able  to  take  such 
action  through  the  Inter-State  Commerce  Commission  and 
the  Department  of  Justice,  supplemented  by  the  necessary 
additional  legislation,  that  the  evil  was  absolutely  eradi 
cated.  He  thus  rendered,  of  his  own  accord,  at  his  own 
personal  risk,  and  from  purely  disinterested  motives,  an 
invaluable  service  to  the  people,  a  service  which  no  other 
man  who  was  able  to  render  was  willing  to  render.  As  an 
immediate  sequel,  the  world-old  alliance  between  Blifil  and 
Black  George  was  immediately  revived  against  Paul  Mor 
ton.  In  giving  rebates  he  had  done  only  what  every  honest 
railway  man  in  the  country  had  been  obliged  to  do  because 
of  the  failure  of  the  Government  to  enforce  the  prohibition 
as  regards  dishonest  railway  men.  But  unlike  his  fellows 
he  had  then  shown  the  courage  and  sense  of  obligation  to 
the  public  which  made  him  come  forward  and  without 


THE   BIG   STICK  AND   THE   SQUARE   DEAL      435 

evasion  or  concealment  state  what  he  had  done,  in  order 
that  we  might  successfully  put  an  end  to  the  practice ;  and 
put  an  end  to  the  practice  we  did,  and  we  did  it  because  of 
the  courage  and  patriotism  he  had  shown.  The  unscrupu 
lous  railway  men,  whose  dishonest  practices  were  thereby 
put  a  stop  to,  and  the  unscrupulous  demagogues  wrho  either 
under  the  influence  of  these  men  or  desirous  of  gaining 
credit  with  thoughtless  and  ignorant  people  no  matter  who 
was  hurt,  joined  in  vindictive  clamor  against  Mr.  Morton. 
They  actually  wished  me  to  prosecute  him,  although  such 
prosecution  would  have  been  a  piece  of  unpardonable  in 
gratitude  and  treachery  on  the  part  of  the  public  toward 
him — for  I  was  merely  acting  as  the  steward  of  the  public 
in  this  matter.  I  need  hardly  say  that  I  stood  by  him ;  and 
later  he  served  under  me  as  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  and  a 
capital  Secretary  he  made  too. 

We  not  only  secured  the  stopping  of  rebates,  but  in  the 
Hepburn  Bate  Bill  we  were  able  to  put  through  a  measure 
which  gave  the  Inter-State  Commerce  Commission  for  the 
first  time  real  control  over  the  railways.  There  were  two 
or  three  amusing  features  in  the  contest  over  this  bill.  All 
of  the  great  business  interests  which  objected  to  Govern 
mental  control  banded  to  fight  it,  and  they  were  helped  by 
the  honest  men  of  ultra-conservative  type  who  always  dread 
change,  whether  good  or  bad.  We  finally  forced  it  through 
the  House.  In  the  Senate  it  was  referred  to  a  committee 
in  which  the  Republican  majority  was  under  the  control  of 
Senator  Aldrich,  who  took  the  lead  in  opposing  the  bill. 
There  was  one  Eepublican  on  the  committee,  however, 
whom  Senator  Aldrich  could  not  control — Senator  Dolliver, 
of  Iowa.  The  leading  Democrat  on  the  committee  was 
Senator  Tillman,  of  South  Carolina,  with  whom  I  was  not 
on  good  terms,  because  I  had  been  obliged  to  cancel  an  invi 
tation  to  him  to  dine  at  the  White  House  on  account  of  his 
having  made  a  personal  assault  in  the  Senate  Chamber  on 
his  colleague  from  South  Carolina ;  and  later  I  had  to  take 
action  against  him  on  account  of  his  conduct  in  connection 
with  certain  land  matters.  Senator  Tillman  favored  the 


436    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

bill.  The  Kepublican  majority  in  the  committee  under 
Senator  Aldrich,  when  they  acted  adversely  on  the  bill, 
turned  it  over  to  Senator  Tillman,  thereby  making  him  its 
sponsor.  The  object  was  to  create  what  it  was  hoped  would 
be  an  impossible  situation  in  view  of  the  relations  between 
Senator  Tillman  and  myself.  I  regarded  the  action  as 
simply  childish.  It  was  a  curious  instance  of  how  able  and 
astute  men  sometimes  commit  blunders  because  of  sheer 
inability  to  understand  intensity  of  disinterested  motive 
in  others.  I  did  not  care  a  rap  about  Mr.  Tillman 's  getting 
credit  for  the  bill,  or  having  charge  of  it.  I  was  delighted 
to  go  with  him  or  with  any  one  else  just  so  long  as  he  was 
traveling  my  way — and  no  longer. 

There  was  another  amusing  incident  in  connection  with 
the  passage  of  the  bill.  All  the  wise  friends  of  the  effort  to 
secure  Governmental  control  of  corporations  know  that  this 
Government  control  must  be  exercised  through  administra 
tive  and  not  judicial  officers  if  it  is  to  be  effective.  Every 
thing  possible  should  be  done  to  minimize  the  chance  of 
appealing  from  the  decisions  of  the  administrative  officer 
to  the  courts.  But  it  is  not  possible  Constitutionally,  and 
probably  would  not  be  desirable  anyhow,  completely  to 
abolish  the  appeal.  Unwise  zealots  wished  to  make  the 
effort  totally  to  abolish  the  appeal  in  connection  with  the 
Hepburn  Bill.  Eepresentatives  of  the  special  interests 
wished  to  extend  the  appeal  to  include  what  it  ought  not 
to  include.  Between  stood  a  number  of  men  whose  votes 
would  mean  the  passage  of,  or  the  failure  to  pass,  the  bill, 
and  who  were  not  inclined  towards  either  side.  Three  or 
four  substantially  identical  amendments  were  proposed, 
and  we  then  suddenly  found  ourselves  face  to  face  with  an 
absurd  situation.  The  good  men  who  were  willing  to  go 
with  us  but  had  conservative  misgivings  about  the  ultra- 
radicals  would  not  accept  a  good  amendment  if  one  of  the 
latter  proposed  it ;  and  the  radicals  would  not  accept  their 
own  amendment  if  one  of  the  conservatives  proposed  it. 
Each  side  got  so  wrought  up  as  to  be  utterly  unable  to  get 
matters  into  proper  perspective;  each  prepared  to  stand 


THE    BIG   STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      437 

on  unimportant  trifles;  each  announced  with  hysterical 
emphasis — the  reformers  just  as  hysterically  as  the  reac 
tionaries — that  the  decision  as  regards  each  unimportant 
trifle  determined  the  worth  or  worthlessness  of  the  measure. 
Gradually  we  secured  a  measurable  return  to  sane  appre 
ciation  of  the  essentials.  Finally  both  sides  reluctantly 
agreed  to  accept  the  so-called  Allison  amendment  which  did 
not,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  work  any  change  in  the  bill  at  all. 
The  amendment  was  drawn  by  Attorney-General  Moody 
after  consultation  with  the  Inter-State  Commerce  Commis 
sion,  and  was  forwarded  by  me  to  Senator  Dolliver ;  it  was 
accepted,  and  the  bill  became  law. 

Thanks  to  this  law  and  to  the  way  in  which  the  Inter- 
State  Commerce  Commission  was  backed  by  the  Admin 
istration,  the  Commission,  under  men  like  Prouty,  Lane, 
and  Clark,  became  a  most  powerful  force  for  good.  Some 
of  the  good  that  we  had  accomplished  was  undone  after  the 
close  of  my  Administration  by  the  unfortunate  law  creating 
a  Commerce  Court;  but  the  major  part  of  the  immense  ad 
vance  we  had  made  remained.  There  was  one  point  on 
which  I  insisted,  and  upon  which  it  is  necessary  always  to 
insist.  The  Commission  cannot  do  permanent  good  unless 
it  does  justice  to  the  corporations  precisely  as  it  exacts 
justice  from  them.  The  public,  the  shippers,  the  stock  and 
bondholders,  and  the  employees,  all  have  their  rights,  and 
none  should  be  allowed  unfair  privileges  at  the  expense  of 
the  others.  Stock  watering,  and  swindling  of  any  kind 
should  of  course  not  only  be  stopped  but  punished.  When, 
however,  a  road  is  managed  fairly  and  honestly,  and  when 
it  renders  a  real  and  needed  service,  then  the  Government 
must  see  that  it  is  not  so  burdened  as  to  make  it  impossible 
to  run  it  at  a  profit.  There  is  much  wise  legislation  neces 
sary  for  the  safety  of  the  public,  or — like  workmen's  com 
pensation — necessary  to  the  well-being  of  the  employee, 
which  nevertheless  imposes  such  a  burden  on  the  road  that 
the  burden  must  be  distributed  between  the  general  public 
and  the  corporation,  or  there  will  be  no  dividends.  In  such 
a  case  it  may  be  the  highest  duty  of  the  commission  to  raise 


438    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

rates ;  and  the  commission,  when  satisfied  that  the  necessity 
exists,  in  order  to  do  justice  to  the  owners  of  the  road, 
should  no  more  hesitate  to  raise  rates,  than  under  other 
circumstances  to  lower  them. 

So  much  for  the  "big  stick "  in  dealing  with  the  corpora 
tions  when  they  went  wrong.  Now  for  a  sample  of  the 
square  deal. 

In  the  fall  of  1907  there  were  severe  business  disturbances 
and  financial  stringency,  culminating  in  a  panic  which  arose 
in  New  York  and  spread  over  the  country.  The  damage 
actually  done  was  great,  and  the  damage  threatened  was 
incalculable.  Thanks  largely  to  the  action  of  the  Govern 
ment,  the  panic  was  stopped  before,  instead  of  being  merely 
a  serious  business  check,  it  became  a  frightful  and  Nation 
wide  calamity,  a  disaster  fraught  with  untold  misery  and 
woe  to  all  our  people.  For  several  days  the  Nation  trembled 
on  the  brink  of  such  a  calamity,  of  such  a  disaster. 

During  these  days  both  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
and  I  personally  were  in  hourly  communication  with  New 
York,  following  every  change  in  the  situation,  and  trying 
to  anticipate  every  development.  It  was  the  obvious  duty 
of  the  Administration  to  take  every  step  possible  to  pre 
vent  appalling  disaster  by  checking  the  spread  of  the  panic 
before  it  grew  so  that  nothing  could  check  it.  Ajid  events 
moved  with  such  speed  that  it  was  necessary  to  decide  and 
to  act  on  the  instant,  as  each  successive  crisis  arose,  if  the 
decision  and  action  were  to  accomplish  anything.  The  Sec 
retary  of  the  Treasury  took  various  actions,  some  on  his 
own  initiative,  some  by  my  direction.  Late  one  evening  I 
was  informed  that  two  representatives  of  the  Steel  Cor 
poration  wished  to  see  me  early  the  following  morning,  the 
precise  object  not  being  named.  Next  morning,  while  at 
breakfast,  I  was  informed  that  Messrs.  Frick  and  Gary 
were  waiting  at  the  office.  I  at  once  went  over,  and,  as  the 
Attorney-General,  Mr.  Bonaparte,  had  not  yet  arrived  from 
Baltimore,  where  he  had  been  passing  the  night,  I  sent  a 
message  asking  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr.  Root,  who  was 
also  a  lawyer,  to  join  us,  which  he  did.  Before  the  close 


THE   BIG  STICK  AND   THE   SQUARE   DEAL      43d 

of  the  interview  and  in  the  presence  of  the  three  gentlemen 
named,  I  dictated  a  note  to  Mr.  Bonaparte,  setting  forth 
exactly  what  Messrs.  Frick  and  Gary  had  proposed,  and 
exactly  what  I  had  answered — so  that  there  might  be  no 
possibility  of  misunderstanding.  This  note  was  published 
in  a  Senate  Document  while  I  was  still  President.  It  runs 
as  follows : 

THE  WHITE  HOUSE,  WASHINGTON, 

November  4,  1907. 
My  dear  Mr.  Attorney-General: 

Judge  E.  H.  Gary  and  Mr.  H.  C.  Frick,  on  behalf  of  the 
Steel  Corporation,  have  just  called  upon  me.  They  state 
that  there  is  a  certain  business  firm  (the  name  of  which  I 
have  not  been  told,  but  which  is  of  real  importance  in  New 
York  business  circles),  which  will  undoubtedly  fail  this 
week  if  help  is  not  given.  Among  its  assets  are  a  majority 
of  the  securities  of  the  Tennessee  Coal  Company.  Appli 
cation  has  been  urgently  made  to  the  Steel  Corporation  to 
purchase  this  stock  as  the  only  means  of  avoiding  a  failure. 
Judge  Gary  and  Mr.  Frick  informed  me  that  as  a  mere 
business  transaction  they  do  not  care  to  purchase  the  stock ; 
that  under  ordinary  circumstances  they  would  not  consider 
purchasing  the  stock,  because  but  little  benefit  will  come 
to  the  Steel  Corporation  from  the  purchase ;  that  they  are 
aware  that  the  purchase  will  be  used  as  a  handle  for  attack 
upon  them  on  the  ground  that  they  are  striving  to  secure  a 
monopoly  of  the  business  and  prevent  competition — not 
that  this  would  represent  what  could  honestly  be  said,  but 
what  might  recklessly  and  untruthfully  be  said. 

They  further  informed  me  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the 
policy  of  the  company  has  been  to  decline  to  acquire  more 
than  sixty  per  cent  of  the  steel  properties,  and  that  this 
purpose  has  been  persevered  in  for  several  years  past,  with 
the  object  of  preventing  these  accusations,  and,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  their  proportion  of  steel  properties  has  slightly 
decreased,  so  that  it  is  below  this  sixty  per  cent,  and  the 
acquisition  of  the  property  in  question  will  not  raise  it 
above  sixty  per  cent.  But  they  feel  that  it  is  immensely  to 


440    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

their  interest,  as  to  the  interest  of  every  responsible  busi 
ness  man,  to  try  to  prevent  a  panic  and  general  industrial 
smash-up  at  this  time,  and  that  they  are  willing  to  go  into 
this  transaction,  which  they  would  not  otherwise  go  into, 
because  it  seems  the  opinion  of  those  best  fitted  to  express 
judgment  in  New  York  that  it  will  be  an  important  factor 
in  preventing  a  break  that  might  be  ruinous ;  and  that  this 
has  been*  urged  upon  them  by  the  combination  of  the  most 
responsible  bankers  in  New  York  who  are  now  thus  en 
gaged  in  endeavoring  to  save  the  situation.  But  they  as 
serted  that  they  did  not  wish  to  do  this  if  I  stated  that  it 
ought  not  to  be  done.  I  answered  that,  while  of  course  I 
could  not  advise  them  to  take  the  action  proposed,  I  felt  it 
no  public  duty  of  mine  to  interpose  any  objections. 

Sincerely  Yours, 
(Signed)  THEODORE  ROOSEVELT. 
HON.  CHARLES  J.  BONAPARTE, 
Attorney-General. 

Mr.  Bonaparte  received  this  note  in  about  an  hour,  and 
that  same  morning  he  came  over,  acknowledged  its  receipt, 
and  said  that  my  answer  was  the  only  proper  answer  that 
could  have  been  made,  having  regard  both  to  the  law  and  to 
the  needs  of  the  situation.  He  stated  that  the  legal  situa 
tion  had  been  in  no  way  changed,  and  that  no  sufficient 
ground  existed  for  prosecution  of  the  Steel  Corporation. 
But  I  acted  purely  on  my  own  initiative,  and  the  responsi 
bility  for  the  act  was  solely  mine. 

I  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the  situation  in  New 
York.  The  word  " panic"  means  fear,  unreasoning  fear; 
to  stop  a  panic  it  is  necessary  to  restore  confidence ;  and  at 
the  moment  the  so-called  Morgan  interests  were  the  only 
interests  which  retained  a  full  hold  on  the  confidence  of  the 
people  of  New  York — not  only  the  business  people,  but  the 
immense  mass  of  men  and  women  who  owned  small  invest 
ments  or  had  small  savings  in  the  banks  and  trust  com 
panies.  Mr.  Morgan  and  his  associates  were  of  course  fight 
ing  hard  to  prevent  the  loss  of  confidence  and  the  panic 


THE    BIG   STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      441 

distrust  from  increasing  to  such  a  degree  as  to  bring  any 
other  big  financial  institutions  down;  for  this  would  prob 
ably  have  been  followed  by  a  general,  and  very  likely  a 
worldwide,  crash.  The  Knickerbocker  Trust  Company  had 
already  failed,  and  runs  had  begun  on,  or  were  threatened 
as  regards,  two  other  big  trust  companies.  These  com 
panies  were  now  on  the  fighting  line,  and  it  was  to  the  inter 
est  of  everybody  to  strengthen  them,  in  order  that  the  situa 
tion  might  be  saved.  It  was  a  matter  of  general  knowledge 
and  belief  that  they,  or  the  individuals  prominent  in  them, 
held  the  securities  of  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Com 
pany,  which  securities  had  no  market  value,  and  were  use 
less  as  a  source  of  strength  in  the  emergency.  The  Steel 
Corporation  securities,  on  the  contrary,  were  immediately 
marketable,  their  great  value  being  known  and  admitted 
all  over  the  world — as  the  event  showed.  The  proposal  of 
Messrs.  Frick  and  Gary  was  that  the  Steel  Corporation 
should  at  once  acquire  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Com 
pany,  and  thereby  substitute,  among  the  assets  of  the 
threatened  institutions  (which,  by  the  way,  they  did  not 
name  to  me),  securities  of  great  and  immediate  value  for 
securities  which  at  the  moment  were  of  no  value.  It  was 
necessary  for  me  to  decide  on  the  instant,  before  the  Stock 
Exchange  opened,  for  the  situation  in  New  York  was  such 
that  any  hour  might  be  vital,  and  failure  to  act  for  even  an 
hour  might  make  all  subsequent  effort  to  act  utterly  useless. 
From  the  best  information  at  my  disposal,  I  believed  (what 
was  actually  the  fact)  that  the  addition  of  the  Tennessee 
Coal  and  Iron  property  would  only  increase  the  proportion 
of  the  Steel  Company's  holdings  by  about  four  per  cent, 
making  them  about  sixty-two  per  cent  instead  of  about  fifty- 
eight  per  cent  of  the  total  value  in  the  country;  an  addition 
which,  by  itself,  in  my  judgment  (concurred  in,  not  only 
by  the  Attorney- General  but  by  every  competent  lawyer), 
worked  no  change  in  the  legal  status  of  the  Steel  corpora 
tion.  The  diminution  in  the  percentage  of  holdings,  and 
production,  has  gone  on  steadily,  and  the  percentage  is  now 
about  ten  per  cent  less  than  it  was  ten  years  ago. 


442    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

The  action  was  emphatically  for  the  general  good.  It 
offered  the  only  chance  for  arresting  the  panic,  and  it  did 
arrest  the  panic.  I  answered  Messrs.  Frick  and  Gary,  as 
set  forth  in  the  letter  quoted  above,  to  the  effect  that  I  did 
not  deem  it  my  duty  to  interfere,  that  is,  to  forbid  the  action 
which  more  than  anything  else  in  actual  fact  saved  the  situa 
tion.  The  result  justified  my  judgment.  The  panic  was 
stopped,  public  confidence  in  the  solvency  of  the  threatened 
institution  being  at  once  restored. 

Business  was  vitally  helped  by  what  I  did.  The  benefit 
was  not  only  for  the  mcment.  It  was  permanent.  Particu 
larly  was  this  the  case  in  the  South.  Three  or  four  years 
afterwards  I  visited  Birmingham.  Every  man  I  met,  with 
out  exception,  who  was  competent  to  testify,  informed  me 
voluntarily  that  the  results  of  the  action  taken  had  been 
of  the  utmost  benefit  to  Birmingham,  and  therefore  to  Ala 
bama,  the  industry  having  profited  to  an  extraordinary  de 
gree,  not  only  from  the  standpoint  of  the  business,  but  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  community  at  large  and  of  the  wage- 
workers,  by  the  change  in  ownership.  The  results  of  the 
action  I  took  were  beneficial  from  every  standpoint,  and  the 
action  itself,  at  the  time  when  it  was  taken,  was  vitally 
necessary  to  the  welfare  of  the  people  of  the  United  States. 

I  would  have  been  derelict  in  my  duty,  I  would  have 
shown  myself  a  timid  and  unworthy  public  servant,  if  in 
that  extraordinary  crisis  I  had  not  acted  precisely  as  I  did 
act.  In  every  such  crisis  the  temptation  to  indecision,  to 
non- action,  is  great,  for  excuses  can  always  be  found  for 
non-action,  and  action  means  risk  and  the  certainty  of  blame 
to  the  man  who  acts.  But  if  the  man  is  worth  his  salt  he 
will  do  his  duty,  he  will  give  the  people  the  benefit  of  the 
doubt,  and  act  in  any  way  which  their  interests  demand  and 
which  is  not  affirmatively  prohibited  by  law,  unheeding  the 
likelihood  that  he  himself,  when  the  crisis  is  over  and  the 
danger  past,  will  be  assailed  for  what  he  has  done. 

Every  step  I  took  in  this  matter  was  open  as  the  day,  and 
was  known  in  detail  at  the  moment  to  all  people.  The  press 
contained  full  accounts  of  the  visit  to  me  of  Messrs.  Frick 


THE   BIG   STICK   AND   THE   SQUARE   DEAL      443 

and  Gary,  and  heralded  widely  and  with  acclamation  the  re 
sults  of  that  visit.  At  the  time  the  relief  and  rejoicing  over 
what  had  been  done  were  well-nigh  universal.  The  danger 
was  too  imminent  and  too  appalling  for  men  to  be  willing 
to  condemn  those  who  were  successful  in  saving  them  from 
it.  But  I  fully  understood  and  expected  that  when  there 
was  no  longer  danger,  when  the  fear  had  been  forgotten, 
attack  would  be  made  upon  me;  and  as  a  matter  of  fact 
after  a  year  had  elapsed  the  attack  was  begun,  and  has  con 
tinued  at  intervals  ever  since ;  my  ordinary  assailant  being 
some  politician  of  rather  cheap  type. 

If  I  were  on  a  sail-boat,  I  should  not  ordinarily  meddle 
with  any  of  the  gear ;  but  if  a  sudden  squall  struck  us,  and 
the  main  sheet  jammed,  so  that  the  boat  threatened  to  cap 
size,  I  would  unhesitatingly  cut  the  main  sheet,  even  though 
I  were  sure  that  the  owner,  no  matter  how  grateful  to  me 
at  the  moment  for  having  saved  his  life,  would  a  few  weeks 
later,  when  he  had  forgotten  his  danger  and  his  fear,  decide 
to  sue  me  for  the  value  of  the  cut  rope.  But  I  would  feel  a 
hearty  contempt  for  the  owner  who  so  acted. 

There  were  many  other  things  that  we  did  in  connection 
with  corporations.  One  of  the  most  important  was  the  pas 
sage  of  the  meat  inspection  law  because  of  scandalous 
abuses  shown  to  exist  in  the  great  packing-houses  in 
Chicago  and  elsewhere.  There  was  a  curious  result  of  this 
law,  similar  to  what  occurred  in  connection  with  the  law 
providing  for  effective  railway  regulation.  The  big  beef 
men  bitterly  opposed  the  law ;  just  as  the  big  railway  men 
opposed  the  Hepburn  Act.  Yet  three  or  four  years  after 
these  laws  had  been  put  on  the  statute  books  every  honest 
man  both  in  the  beef  business  and  the  railway  business 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  they  worked  good  and  not  harm 
to  the  decent  business  concerns.  They  hurt  only  those  who 
were  not  acting  as  they  should  have  acted.  The  law  pro 
viding  for  the  inspection  of  packing-houses,  and  the  Pure 
Food  and  Drugs  Act,  were  also  extremely  important;  and 
the  way  in  which  they  were  administered  was  even  more 
important.  It.  would  be  hard  to  overstate  the  value  of  the 


444    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

service  rendered  in  all  these  cases  by  such  cabinet  officers 
as  Moody  and  Bonaparte,  and  their  outside  assistants  of 
the  stamp  of  Frank  Kellogg. 

It  would  be  useless  to  enumerate  all  the  suits  we  brought. 
Some  of  them  I  have  already  touched  upon.  Others,  such 
as  the  suits  against  the  Harriman  railway  corporations, 
which  were  successful,  and  which  had  been  rendered  abso 
lutely  necessary  by  the  grossly  improper  action  of  the  cor 
porations  concerned,  offered  no  special  points  of  interest. 
The  Sugar  Trust  proceedings,  however,  may  be  mentioned 
as  showing  just  the  kind  of  thing  that  was  done  and  the 
kind  of  obstacle  encountered  and  overcome  in  prosecutions 
of  this  character. 

It  was  on  the  advice  of  my  secretary,  William  Loeb,  Jr., 
afterward  head  of  the  New  York  Custom-House,  that  the 
action  was  taken  which  started  the  uncovering  of  the  frauds 
perpetrated  by  the  Sugar  Trust  and  other  companies  in 
connection  with  the  importing  of  sugar.  Loeb  had  from 
time  to  time  told  me  that  he  was  sure  that  there  was  fraud 
in  connection  with  the  importations  by  the  Sugar  Trust 
through  the  New  York  Custom-House.  Finally,  some  time 
toward  the  end  of  1904,  lie  informed  me  that  Eichard  Parr, 
a  sampler  at  the  New  York  Appraisers'  Stores  (whose 
duties  took  him  almost  continually  on  the  docks  in  connec 
tion  with  the  sampling  of  merchandise),  had  called  on  him, 
and  had  stated  that  in  his  belief  the  sugar  companies  were 
defrauding  the  Government  in  the  matter  of  weights,  and 
had  stated  that  if  he  could  be  made  an  investigating  officer 
of  the  Treasury  Department,  he  was  confident  that  he  could 
show  there  was  wrongdoing.  Parr  had  been  a  former  school 
fellow  of  Loeb  in  Albany,  and  Loeb  believed  him  to  be  loyal, 
honest,  and  efficient.  He  thereupon  laid  the  matter  before 
me,  and  advised  the  appointment  of  Parr  as  a  special  em 
ployee  of  the  Treasury  Department,  for  the  specific  pur 
pose  of  investigating  the  alleged  sugar  frauds.  I  instructed 
the  Treasury  Department  accordingly,  and  was  informed 
that  there  was  no  vacancy  in  the  force  of  special  employees, 
but  that  Parr  would  be  given  the  first  place  that  opened  up* 


THE    BIG   STICK    AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      445 

Early  in  the  spring  of  1905  Parr  came  to  Loeb  again,  and 
said  that  he  had  received  additional  information  about  the 
sugar  frauds,  and  was  anxious  to  begin  the  investigation. 
Loeb  again  discussed  the  matter  with  me;  and  I  notified 
the  Treasury  Department  to  appoint  Parr  immediately. 
On  June  1,  1905,  he  received  his  appointment,  and  was  as 
signed  to  the  port  of  Boston  for  the  purpose  of  gaining 
some  experience  as  an  investigating  officer.  During  the 
month  he  was  transferred  to  the  Maine  District,  with  head 
quarters  at  Portland,  where  he  remained  until  March,  1907. 
During  his  service  in  Maine  he  uncovered  extensive  wool 
smuggling  frauds.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  wool  case,  he 
appealed  to  Loeb  to  have  him  transferred  to  New  York, 
so  that  he  might  undertake  the  investigation  of  the  sugar 
underweighing  frauds.  I  now  called  the  attention  of  Secre 
tary  Cortelyou  personally  to  the  matter,  so  that  he  wrould 
be  able  to  keep  a  check  over  any  subordinates  who  might 
try  to  interfere  with  Parr,  for  the  conspiracy  was  evidently 
widespread,  the  wealth  of  the  offenders  great,  and  the  cor 
ruption  in  the  service  far-reaching — while  moreover  as  al 
ways  happens  with  "respectable"  offenders,  there  were 
many  good  men  who  sincerely  disbelieved  in  the  possibility 
of  corruption  on  the  part  of  men  of  such  high  financial 
standing.  Parr  was  assigned  to  New  York  early  in  March, 
1907,  and  at  once  began  an  active  investigation  of  the  con 
ditions  existing  on  the  sugar  docks.  This  terminated  in  the 
discovery  of  a  steel  spring  in  one  of  the  scales  of  the  Have- 
meyer  &  Elder  docks  in  Brooklyn,  November  20, 1907,  which 
enabled  us  to  uncover  what  were  probably  the  most  co 
lossal  frauds  ever  perpetrated  in  the  Customs  Service. 
From  the  beginning  of  his  active  work  in  the  investigation 
of  the  sugar  frauds  in  March,  1907,  to  March  4,  1909,  Parr, 
from  time  to  time,  personally  reported  to  Loeb,  at  the 
White  House,  the  progress  of  his  investigations,  and  Loeb 
in  his  turn  kept  me  personally  advised.  On  one  occasion 
there  was  an  attempt  made  to  shunt  Parr  off  the  investi 
gation  and  substitute  another  agent  of  the  Treasury,  who 
was  suspected  of  having  some  relations  with  the  sugar 


446    TIJEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

companies  tinder  investigation ;  but  Parr  reported  the  facts 
to  Loeb,  I  sent  for  Secretary  Cortelyou,  and  Secretary 
Cortelyou  promptly  took  charge  of  the  matter  himself, 
putting  Parr  back  on  the  investigation. 

During  the  investigation  Parr  was  subjected  to  all  sorts 
of  harassments,  including  an  attempt  to  bribe  him  by 
Spitzer,  the  dock  superintendent  of  the  Havemeyer  &  Elder 
Refinery,  for  which  Spitzer  was  convicted  and  served  a  term 
in  prison.  Brzezinski,  a  special  agent,  who  was  assisting 
Parr,  was  convicted  of  perjury  and  also  served  a  term  in 
prison,  he  having  changed  his  testimony,  in  the  trial  of 
Spitzer  for  the  attempted  bribery  of  Parr,  from  that  which 
he  gave  before  the  Grand  Jury.  For  his  extraordinary 
services  in  connection  with  this  investigation  Parr  was 
granted  an  award  of  $100,000  by  the  Treasury  Department. 

District-Attorney  Stimson,  of  New  York,  assisted  by 
Denison,  Frankfurter,  Wise,  and  other  employees  of  the 
Department  of  Justice,  took  charge  of  the  case,  and  carried 
on  both  civil  and  criminal  proceedings.  The  trial  in  the 
action  against  the  Sugar  Trust,  for  the  recovery  of  duties 
on  the  cargo  of  sugar,  which  was  being  sent  over  the  scales 
at  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  the  steel  spring  by  Parr,  was 
begun  in  1908 ;  judgment  was  rendered  against  the  defend 
ants  on  March  5,  1909,  the  day  after  I  left  office.  Over 
four  million  dollars  were  recovered  and  paid  back  into  the 
United  States  Treasury  by  the  sugar  companies  which  had 
perpetrated  the  various  forms  of  fraud.  These  frauds  were 
unearthed  by  Parr,  Loeb,  Stimson,  Frankfurter,  and  the 
other  men  mentioned  and  their  associates,  and  it  was  to 
them  that  the  people  owed  the  refunding  of  the  huge  sum  of 
money  mentioned.  "We  had  already  secured  heavy  fines 
from  the  Sugar  Trust,  and  from  various  big  railways,  and 
private  individuals,  such  as  Edwin  Earle,  for  unlawful  re 
bates.  In  the  case  of  the  chief  offender,  the  American  Sugar 
Refining  Company  (the  Sugar  Trust),  criminal  prosecu 
tions  were  carried  on  against  every  living  man  whose  posi 
tion  was  such  that  he  would  naturally  know  about  the 
fraud.  All  of  them  were  indicted,  and  the  biggest  and  most 


THE    BIG   STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      447 

responsible  ones  were  convicted.  The  evidence  showed  that 
the  president  of  the  company,  Henry  0.  Havemeyer,  vir 
tually  ran  the  entire  company,  and  was  responsible  for  all 
the  details  of  the  management.  He  died  two  weeks  after 
the  fraud  was  discovered,  just  as  proceedings  were  being 
begun.  Next  to  him  in  importance  was  the  secretary  and 
treasurer,  Charles  R.  Heike,  who  was  convicted.  Various 
other  officials  and  employees  of  the  Trust,  and  various  Gov 
ernment  employees,  were  indicted,  and  most  of  them  con 
victed.  Ernest  W.  Gerbracht,  the  superintendent  of  one  of 
the  refineries,  was  convicted,  but  his  sentence  was  com 
muted  to  a  short  jail  imprisonment,  because  he  became  a 
Government  witness  and  greatly  assisted  the  Government 
in  the  suits. 

Heike 's  sentence  was  commuted  so  as  to  excuse  him  from 
going  to  the  penitentiary ;  just  as  the  penitentiary  sentence 
of  Morse,  the  big  New  York  banker,  who  was  convicted  of 
gross  fraud  and  misapplication  of  funds,  was  commuted. 
Both  commutations  were  granted  long  after  I  left  office. 
In  each  case  the  commutation  was  granted  because,  as  was 
stated,  of  the  prisoner 's  age  and  state  of  health.  In  Morse 's 
case  the  President  originally  refused  the  request,  saying 
that  Morse  had  exhibited  "fraudulent  and  criminal  disre 
gard  of  the  trust  imposed  upon  him,"  that  "he  was  entirely 
unscrupulous  as  to  the  methods  he  adopted,"  and  "that  he 
seemed  at  times  to  be  absolutely  heartless  with  regard  to  the 
consequences  to  others,  and  he  showed  great  shrewdness  in 
obtaining  large  sums  of  money  from  the  bank  without  ade 
quate  security  and  without  making  himself  personally  liable 
therefor."  The  two  cases  may  be  considered  in  connection 
with  the  announcement  in  the  public  press  that  on  May  17, 
1913,  the  President  commuted  the  sentence  of  Lewis  A. 
Banks,  who  was  serving  a  very  long  term  penitentiary  sen 
tence  for  an  attack  on  a  girl  in  the  Indian  Territory;  "the 
reason  for  the  commutation  which  is  set  forth  in  the  press 
being  that ' Banks  is  in  poor  health.' 

It  is  no  easy  matter  to  balance  the  claims  of  justice  and 
mercy  in  such  cases.  In  these  three  cases,  of  all  of  which  I 


448    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

had  personal  cognizance,  I  disagreed  radically  with  the 
views  my  successors  took,  and  with  the  views  which  many 
respectable  men  took  who  in  these  and  similar  cases,  both 
while  I  was  in  office  and  afterward,  urged  me  to  show,  or  to 
ask  others  to  show,  clemency.  It  then  seemed  to  me,  and  it 
now  seems  to  me,  that  such  clemency  is  from  the  larger 
standpoint  a  gross  wrong  to  the  men  and  women  of  the 
country. 

One  of  the  former  special  assistants  of  the  district-attor 
ney,  Mr.  W.  Cleveland  Runyon,  in  commenting  bitterly  on 
the  release  of  Heike  and  Morse  on  account  of  their  health, 
pointed  out  that  their  health  apparently  became  good  when 
once  they  themselves  became  free  men,  and  added: 

"The  commutation  of  these  sentences  amounts  to  a  direct 
interference  with  the  administration  of  justice  by  the  courts. 
Heike  got  a  $25,000  salary  and  has  escaped  his  imprison 
ment,  but  what  about  the  six  $18  a  week  checkers,  who  were 
sent  to  jail,  one  of  them  a  man  of  more  than  sixty?  It  is 
cases  like  this  that  create  discontent  and  anarchy.  They 
make  it  seem  plain  that  there  is  one  law  for  the  rich  and 
another  for  the  poor  man,  and  I  for  one  will  protest/' 

In  dealing  with  Heike  the  individual  (or  Morse  or  any 
other  individual),  it  is  necessary  to  emphasize  the  social 
aspects  of  his  case.  The  moral  of  the  Heike  case,  as  has 
been  well  said,  is  "how  easy  it  is  for  a  man  in  modern  cor 
porate  organization  to  drift  into  wrongdoing."  The  moral 
restraints  are  loosened  in  the  case  of  a  man  like  Heike  by 
the  insulation  of  himself  from  the  sordid  details  of  crime, 
through  industrially  coerced  intervening  agents.  Professor 
Ross  has  made  the  penetrating  observation  that  "distance 
disinfects  dividends ";  it  also  weakens  individual  responsi 
bility,  particularly  on  the  part  of  the  very  managers  of 
large  business,  who  should  feel  it  most  acutely.  One  of  the 
officers  of  the  Department  of  Justice  who  conducted  the 
suit,  and  who  inclined  to  the  side  of  mercy  in  the  matter, 
nevertheless  writes:  "Heike  is  a  beautiful  illustration  of 
mental  and  moral  obscuration  in  the  business  life  of  an 
otherwise  valuable  member  of  society.  Heike  had  an  ample 


THE   BIG   STICK   AND   THE   SQUARE   DEAL      449 

share  in  the  guidance  of  the  affairs  of  the  American  Sugar 
Company,  and  we  are  apt  to  have  a  foreshortened  picture 
of  his  responsibility,  because  he  operated  from  the  easy 
coign  of  vantage  of  executive  remoteness.  It  is  difficult  to 
say  to  what  extent  he  did,  directly  or  indirectly,  profit  by 
the  sordid  practices  of  his  company.  But  the  social  damage 
of  an  individual  in  his  position  may  be  just  as  deep,  whether 
merely  the  zest  of  the  game  or  hard  cash  be  his  dominant 
motive. ' ' 

I  have  coupled  the  cases  of  the  big  banker  and  the  Sugar 
Trust  official  and  the  case  of  the  man  convicted  of  a  criminal 
assault  on  a  woman.  All  of  the  criminals  wrere  released 
from  penitentiary  sentences  on  grounds  of  ill  health.  The 
offenses  were  typical  of  the  worst  crimes  committed  at  the 
two  ends  of  the  social  scale.  One  offense  was  a  crime  of 
brutal  violence;  the  other  offenses  were  crimes  of  astute 
corruption.  All  of  them  were  offenses  which  in  my  judg 
ment  were  of  such  a  character  that  clemency  towards  the 
offender  worked  grave  injustice  to  the  community  as  a 
whole,  injustice  so  grave  that  its  effects  might  be  far-reach 
ing  in  their  damage. 

Every  time  that  rape  or  criminal  assault  on  a  woman  is 
pardoned,  and  anything  less  than  the  full  penalty  of  the 
law  exacted,  a  premium  is  put  on  the  practice  of  lynching 
such  offenders.  Every  time  a  big  moneyed  offender,  who 
naturally  excites  interest  and  sympathy,  and  who  has  many 
friends,  is  excused  from  serving  a  sentence  which  a  man  of 
less  prominence  and  fewer  friends  would  have  to  serve, 
justice  is  discredited  in  the  eyes  of  plain  people — and  to 
undermine  faith  in  justice  is  to  strike  at  the  foundation  of 
the  Republic.  As  for  ill  health,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  few  people  are  as  healthy  in  prison  as  they  would  be 
outside;  and  there  should  be  no  discrimination  among 
criminals  on  this  score;  either  all  criminals  who  grow  un 
healthy  should  be  let  out,  or  none.  Pardons  must  some 
times  be  given  in  order  that  the  cause  of  justice  may  be 
served;  but  in  cases  such  as  these  I  am  considering,  while 
I  know  that  many  amiable  people  differ  from  me,  I  am 


450    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

obliged  to  say  that  in  my  judgment  the  pardons  work  far- 
reaching  harm  to  the  cause  of  justice. 

Among  the  big  corporations  themselves,  even  where  they 
did  wrong,  there  was  a  wide  difference  in  the  moral  obliq 
uity  indicated  by  the  wrongdoer.  There  was  a  wide  dis 
tinction  between  the  offenses  committed  in  the  case  of  the 
Northern  Securities  Company,  and  the  offenses  because  of 
which  the  Sugar  Trust,  the  Tobacco  Trust,  and  the  Stand 
ard  Oil  Trust  were  successfully  prosecuted  under  my  Ad 
ministration.  It  was  vital  to  destroy  the  Northern  Securi 
ties  Company ;  but  the  men  creating  it  had  done  so  in  open 
and  above-board  fashion,  acting  under  what  they,  and  most 
of  the  members  of  the  bar,  thought  to  be  the  law  established 
by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Knight  sugar  case.  But  the 
Supreme  Court  in  its  decree  dissolving  the  Standard  Oil 
and  Tobacco  Trusts,  condemned  them  in  the  severest  lan 
guage  for  moral  turpitude;  and  an  even  severer  meed  of 
condemnation  should  be  visited  on  the  Sugar  Trust. 

However,  all  the  trusts  and  big  corporations  against 
which  we  proceeded — which  included  in  their  directorates 
practically  all  the  biggest  financiers  in  the  country — joined 
in  making  the  bitterest  assaults  on  me  and  on  my  Adminis 
tration.  Of  their  actions  I  wrote  as  follows  to  Attorney- 
General  Bonaparte,  who  had  been  a  peculiarly  close  friend 
and  adviser  through  the  period  covered  by  my  public  life  in 
high  office  and  who,  together  with  Attorney-General  Moody, 
possessed  the  same  understanding  sympathy  with  my  social 
and  industrial  program  that  was  possessed  by  such  officials 
as  Straus,  Garfield,  H.  K.  Smith,  and  Pinchot.  The  letter 
runs: 

January  2,  1908. 
My  dear  Bonaparte: 

I  must  congratulate  you  on  your  admirable  speech  at 
Chicago.  You  said  the  very  things  it  was  good  to  say  at 
this  time.  What  you  said  bore  especial  weight  because  it 
represented  what  you  had  done.  You  have  shown  by  what 
you  have  actually  accomplished  that  the  law  is  enforced 
against  the  wealthiest  corporation,  and  the  richest  and  most 


THE    BIG    STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      451 

powerful  manager  or  manipulator  of  that  corporation,  just 
as  resolutely  and  fearlessly  as  against  the  humblest  citizen. 
The  Department  of  Justice  is  now  in  very  fact  the  Depart 
ment  of  Justice,  and  justice  is  meted  out  with  an  even  hand 
to  great  and  small,  rich  and  poor,  weak  and  strong.  Those 
who  have  denounced  you  and  the  action  of  the  Department 
of  Justice  are  either  misled,  or  else  are  the  very  wrongdoers, 
and  the  agents  of  the  very  wrongdoers,  who  have  for  so 
many  years  gone  scot-free  and  flouted  the  laws  with  im 
punity.  Above  all,  you  are  to  be  congratulated  upon  the 
bitterness  felt  and  expressed  towards  you  by  the  represent 
atives  and  agents  of  the  great  law-defying  corporations  of 
immense  wealth,  who,  until  within  the  last  half-dozen  years, 
have  treated  themselves  and  have  expected  others  to  treat 
them  as  being  beyond  and  above  all  possible  check  from  law. 
It  was  time  to  say  something,  for  the  representatives  of 
predatory  wealth,  of  wealth  accumulated  on  a  giant  scale 
by  iniquity,  by  wrongdoing  in  many  forms,  by  plain  swin 
dling,  by  oppressing  wage-workers,  by  manipulating  secu 
rities,  by  unfair  and  unwholesome  competition  and  by  stock 
jobbing, — in  short,  by  conduct  abhorrent  to  every  man  of 
ordinarily  decent  conscience,  have  during  the  last  few 
months  made  it  evident  that  they  are  banded  together  to 
work  for  a  reaction,  to  endeavor  to  overthrow  and  discredit 
all  who  honestly  administer  the  law,  and  to  secure  a  return 
to  the  days  when  every  unscrupulous  wrongdoer  could  do 
what  he  wished  unchecked,  provided  he  had  enough  money. 
They  attack  you  because  they  know  your  honesty  and  fear 
lessness  and  dread  them.  The  enormous  sums  of  money 
these  men  have  at  their  control  enable  them  to  carry  on 
an  effective  campaign.  They  find  their  tools  in  a  portion 
of  the  public  press,  including  especially  certain  of  the  great 
New  York  newspapers.  They  find  their  agents  in  some 
men  in  public  life, — now  and  then  occupying,  or  having 
occupied,  positions  as  high  as  Senator  or  Governor, — in 
some  men  in  the  pulpit,  and  most  melancholy  of  all,  in  a 
few  men  on  the  bench.  By  gifts  to  colleges  and  univer 
sities  they  are  occasionally  able  to  subsidize  in  their  own 


452    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

interest  some  head  of  an  educational  body,  who,  save  only 
a  judge,  should  of  all  men  be  most  careful  to  keep  his  skirts 
clear  from  the  taint  of  such  corruption.  There  are  ample 
material  rewards  for  those  who  serve  with  fidelity  the 
Mammon  of  unrighteousness,  but  they  are  dearly  paid  for 
by  that  institution  of  learning  whose  head,  by  example 
and  precept,  teaches  the  scholars  who  sit  under  him  that 
there  is  one  law  for  the  rich  and  another  for  the  poor.  The 
amount  of  money  the  representatives  of  the  great  moneyed 
interests  are  willing  to  spend  can  be  gauged  by  their  recent 
publication  broadcast  throughout  the  papers  of  this  country 
from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  of  huge  advertisements, 
attacking  with  envenomed  bitterness  the  Administration's 
policy  of  warring  against  successful  dishonesty,  advertise 
ments  that  must  have  cost  enormous  sums  of  money.  This 
advertisement,  as  also  a  pamphlet  called  "The  Eoosevelt 
Panic, "  and  one  or  two  similar  books  and  pamphlets,  are 
written  especially  in  the  interest  of  the  Standard  Oil  and 
Harriman  combinations,  but  also  defend  all  the  individuals 
and  corporations  of  great  wealth  that  have  been  guilty  of 
wrongdoing.  From  the  railroad  rate  law  to  the  pure  food 
law,  every  measure  for  honesty  in  business  that  has  been 
pressed  during  the  last  six  years,  has  been  opposed  by  these 
men,  on  its  passage  and  in  its  administration,  with  every 
resource  that  bitter  and  unscrupulous  craft  could  suggest, 
and  the  command  of  almost  unlimited  money  secure.  These 
men  do  not  themselves  speak  or  write ;  they  hire  others  to 
do  their  bidding.  Their  spirit  and  purpose  are  made  clear 
alike  by  the  editorials  of  the  papers  owned  in,  or  whose 
policy  is  dictated  by,  Wall  Street,  and  by  the  speeches  of 
public  men  who,  as  Senators,  Governors,  or  Mayors,  have 
served  these  their  masters  to  the  cost  of  the  plain  people. 
At  one  time  one  of  their  writers  or  speakers  attacks  the  rate 
law  as  the  cause  of  the  panic;  he  is,  whether  in  public  life 
or  not,  usually  a  clever  corporation  lawyer,  and  he  is  not  so 
foolish  a  being  as  to  believe  in  the  truth  of  what  he  says ; 
he  has  too  closely  represented  the  railroads  not  to  know 
well  that  the  Hepburn  Bate  Bill  has  helped  every  honest 


THE    BIG    STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      453 

railroad,  and  has  hurt  only  the  railroads  that  regarded 
themselves  as  above  the  law.  At  another  time,  one  of  them 
assails  the  Administration  for  not  imprisoning  people  under 
the  Sherman  Anti-Trust  Law ;  for  declining  to  make  what 
he  well  knows,  in  view  of  the  actual  attitude  of  juries  (as 
shown  in  the  Tobacco  Trust  cases  and  in  San  Francisco 
in  one  or  two  of  the  cases  brought  against  corrupt  business 
men)  would  have  been  the  futile  endeavor  to  imprison  de 
fendants  whom  we  are  actually  able  to  fine.  He  raises  the 
usual  clamor,  raised  by  all  who  object  to  the  enforcement  of 
the  law,  that  we  are  fining  corporations  instead  of  putting 
the  heads  of  the  corporations  in  jail;  and  he  states  that  this 
does  not  really  harm  the  chief  offenders.  Were  this  state 
ment  true,  he  himself  would  not  be  found  attacking  us. 
The  extraordinary  violence  of  the  assault  upon  our  policy 
contained  in  speeches  like  these  in  the  articles  in  the  sub 
sidized  press,  in  such  huge  advertisements  and  pamphlets 
as  those  above  referred  to,  and  the  enormous  sums  of  money 
spent  in  these  various  ways,  give  a  fairly  accurate  measure 
of  the  anger  and  terror  which  our  actions  have  caused  the 
corrupt  men  of  vast  wealth  to  feel  in  the  very  marrow  of 
their  being. 

The  man  thus  attacking  us  is  usually,  like  so  many  of  his 
fellows,  either  a  great  lawyer,  or  a  paid  editor  who  takes  his 
commands  from  the  financiers  and  his  arguments  from  their 
attorneys.  If  the  former,  he  has  defended  many  malefac 
tors,  and  he  knows  well  that,  thanks  to  the  advice  of  lawyers 
like  himself,  a  certain  kind  of  modern  corporation  has  been 
turned  into  an  admirable  instrument  by  which  to  render 
it  well  nigh  impossible  to  get  at  the  really  guilty  man,  so 
that  in  most  cases  the  only  way  of  punishing  the  wrong 
is  by  fining  the  corporation  or  by  proceeding  personally 
against  some  of  the  minor  agents.  These  lawyers  and  their 
employers  are  the  men  mainly  responsible  for  this  state  of 
things,  and  their  responsibility  is  shared  with  the  legisla 
tors  who  ingeniously  oppose  the  passing  of  just  and  ef 
fective  laws,  and  with  those  judges  whose  one  aim  seems  to 
be,  to  construe  such  laws  so  that  they  cannot  be  executed. 


454    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

Nothing  is  sillier  than  this  outcry  on  behalf  of  the  "  inno 
cent  stockholders  "  in  the  corporations.  We  are  besought  to 
pity  the  Standard  Oil  Company  for  a  fine  relatively  far  less 
great  than  the  fines  every  day  inflicted  in  the  police  courts 
upon  multitudes  of  push  cart  peddlers  and  other  petty  of 
fenders,  whose  woes  never  extort  one  word  from  the  men 
whose  withers  are  wrung  by  the  woes  of  the  mighty.  The 
stockholders  have  the  control  of  the  corporation  in  their 
own  hands.  The  corporation  officials  are  elected  by  those 
holding  the  majority  of  the  stock  and  can  keep  office  only  by 
having  behind  them  the  good-will  of  these  majority  stock 
holders.  They  are  not  entitled  to  the  slightest  pity  if  they 
deliberately  choose  to  resign  into  the  hands  of  great  wrong 
doers  the  control  of  the  corporations  in  which  they  own  the 
stock.  Of  course  innocent  people  have  become  involved  in 
these  big  corporations  and  suffer  because  of  the  misdeeds 
of  their  criminal  associates.  Let  these  innocent  people  be 
careful  not  to  invest  in  corporations  where  those  in  control 
are  not  men  of  probity,  men  who  respect  the  laws ;  above  all 
let  them  avoid  the  men  who  make  it  their  one  effort  to  evade 
or  defy  the  laws.  But  if  these  honest  innocent  people  are 
in  the  majority  in  any  corporation  they  can  immediately 
resume  control  and  throw  out  of  the  directory  the  men  who 
misrepresent  them.  Does  any  man  for  a  moment  suppose 
that  the  majority  stockholders  of  the  Standard  Oil  are 
others  than  Mr.  Kockefeller  and  his  associates  themselves 
and  the  beneficiaries  of  their  wrongdoing?  When  the  stock 
is  watered  so  that  the  innocent  investors  suffer,  a  grave 
wrong  is  indeed  done  to  these  innocent  investors  as  well  as 
to  the  public;  but  the  public  men,  lawyers,  and  editors,  to 
whom  I  refer,  do  not  under  these  circumstances  express 
sympathy  for  the  innocent;  on  the  contrary  they  are  the 
first  to  protest  with  frantic  vehemence  against  our  efforts 
by  law  to  put  a  stop  to  over-capitalization  and  stock- water 
ing.  The  apologists  of  successful  dishonesty  always  declaim 
against  any  effort  to  punish  or  prevent  it  on  the  ground 
that  such  effort  will  "unsettle  business."  It  is  they  who  by 
their  acts  have  unsettled  business ;  and  the  very  men  raising 


THE   BIG   STICK  AND   THE   SQUARE   DEAL      455 

this  cry  spend  hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars  in  securing, 
by  speech,  editorial,  book  or  pamphlet,  the  defense  by  mis- 
statement  of  what  they  have  done ;  and  yet  when  we  correct 
their  misstatements  by  telling  the  truth,  they  declaim 
against  us  for  breaking  silence,  lest  "values  be  unsettled!" 
They  have  hurt  honest  business  men,  honest  working  men, 
honest  farmers;  and  now  they  clamor  against  the  truth 
being  told. 

The  keynote  of  all  these  attacks  upon  the  effort  to  se 
cure  honesty  in  business  and  in  politics,  is  expressed  in  a 
recent  speech,  in  which  the  speaker  stated  that  prosperity 
had  been  checked  by  the  effort  for  the  "moral  regeneration 
of  the  business  world,"  an  effort  which  he  denounced  as 
"unnatural,  unwarranted  and  injurious"  and  for  which  he 
stated  the  panic  was  the  penalty.  The  morality  of  such  a 
plea  is  precisely  as  great  as  if  made  on  behalf  of  the  men 
caught  in  a  gambling  establishment  when  that  gambling 
establishment  is  raided  by  the  police.  If  such  words  mean 
anything  they  mean  that  those  whose  sentiments  they 
represent  stand  against  the  effort  to  bring  about  a  moral 
regeneration  of  business  which  will  prevent  a  repetition  of 
the  insurance,  banking  and  street  railroad  scandals  in  New 
York;  a  repetition  of  the  Chicago  and  Alton  deal;  a  repe 
tition  of  the  combination  between  certain  professional  poli 
ticians,  certain  professional  labor  leaders  and  certain  big 
financiers  from  the  disgrace  of  which  San  Francisco  has 
just  been  rescued ;  a  repetition  of  the  successful  efforts  by 
the  Standard  Oil  people  to  crush  out  every  competitor,  to 
overawe  the  common  carriers,  and  to  establish  a  monopoly 
which  treats  the  public  with  the  contempt  which  the  public 
deserves  so  long  as  it  permits  men  like  the  public  men  of 
whom  I  speak  to  represent  it  in  politics,  men  like  the  heads 
of  colleges  to  whom  I  refer  to  educate  its  youth.  The  out 
cry  against  stopping  dishonest  practices  among  the  very 
wealthy  is  precisely  similar  to  the  outcry  raised  against 
every  effort  for  cleanliness  and  decency  in  city  government 
because,  forsooth,  it  will  "hurt  business."  The  same  out 
cry  is  made  against  the  Department  of  Justice  for  prosecut- 


456    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT- AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ing  the  heads  of  colossal  corporations  that  is  made  against 
the  men  who  in  San  Francisco  are  prosecuting  with  im 
partial  severity  the  wrongdoers  among  business  men,  public 
officials,  and  labor  leaders  alike.  The  principle  is  the  same 
in  the  two  cases.  Just  as  the  blackmailer  and  the  bribe- 
giver  stand  on  the  same  evil  eminence  of  infamy,  so  the  man 
who  makes  an  enormous  fortune  by  corrupting  Legislators 
and  municipalities  and  fleecing  his  stockholders  and  the 
public  stands  on  a  level  with  the  creature  who  fattens  on 
the  blood  money  of  the  gambling  house,  the  saloon  and  the 
brothel.  Moreover,  both  kinds  of  corruption  in  the  last 
analysis  are  far  more  intimately  connected  than  would  at 
first  sight  appear;  the  wrongdoing  is  at  bottom  the  same. 
Corrupt  business  and  corrupt  politics  act  and  react,  with 
ever-increasing  debasement,  one  on  the  other;  the  rebate- 
taker,  the  franchise-trafficker,  the  manipulator  of  securities, 
the  purveyor  and  protector  of  vice,  the  black-mailing  ward 
boss,  the  ballot  box  stuffer,  the  demagogue,  the  mob  leader, 
the  hired  bully  and  mankiller,  all  alike  work  at  the  same 
web  of  corruption,  and  all  alike  should  be  abhorred  by 
honest  men. 

The  "business"  which  is  hurt  by  the  movement  for 
honesty  is  the  kind  of  business  which,  in  the  long  run,  it 
pays  the  country  to  have  hurt.  It  is  the  kind  of  business 
which  has  tended  to  make  the  very  name  "high  finance" 
a  term  of  scandal  to  which  all  honest  American  men  of 
business  should  join  in  putting  an  end.  One  of  the  special 
pleaders  for  business  dishonesty,  in  a  recent  speech, 
in  denouncing  the  Administration  for  enforcing  the  law 
against  the  huge  and  corrupt  corporations  which  have  de 
fied  the  law,  also  denounced  it  for  endeavoring  to  secure  a 
far-reaching  law  making  employers  liable  for  injuries  to 
their  employees.  It  is  meet  and  fit  that  the  apologists  for 
corrupt  wealth  should  oppose  every  effort  to  relieve  weak 
and  helpless  people  from  crushing  misfortune  brought  upon 
them  by  injury  in  the  business  from  which  they  gain  a  bare 
livelihood  and  their  employers  fortunes.  It  is  hypocritical 
baseness  to  speak  of  a  girl  who  works  in  a  factory  where  the 


THE    BIG   STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE    DEAL      457 

dangerous  machinery  is  unprotected  as  having  the  " right " 
freely  to  contract  to  expose  herself  to  dangers  to  life  and 
limb.  She  has  no  alternative  but  to  suffer  want  or  else  to 
expose  herself  to  such  dangers, -and  when  she  loses  a  hand 
or  is  otherwise  maimed  or  disfigured  for  life  it  is  a  moral 
wrong  that  the  burden  of  the  risk  necessarily  incidental  to 
the  business  should  be  placed  with  crushing  weight  upon 
her  weak  shoulders  and  the  man  who  has  profited  by  her 
work  escape  scot-free.  This  is  what  our  opponents  advo 
cate,  and  it  is  proper  that  they  should  advocate  it,  for  it 
rounds  out  their  advocacy  of  those  most  dangerous  mem 
bers  of  the  criminal  class,  the  criminals  of  vast  wealth,  the 
men  who  can  afford  best  to  pay  for  such  championship  in 
the  press  and  on  the  stump. 

It  is  difficult  to  speak  about  the  judges,  for  it  behooves 
us  all  to  treat  with  the  utmost  respect  the  high  office  of 
judge;  and  our  judges  as  a  whole  are  brave  and  upright 
men.  But  there  is  need  that  those  who  go  wrong  should  not 
be  allowed  to  feel  that  there  is  no  condemnation  of  their 
wrongdoing.  A  judge  who  on  the  bench  either  truckles  to 
the  mob  or  bows  down  before  a  corporation ;  or  who,  having 
left  the  bench  to  become  a  corporation  lawyer,  seeks  to  aid 
his  clients  by  denouncing  as  enemies  of  property  all  those 
who  seek  to  stop  the  abuses  of  the  criminal  rich;  such  a 
man  performs  an  even  worse  service  to  the  body  politic 
than  the  Legislator  or  Executive  who  goes  wrong.  In  no 
way  can  respect  for  the  courts  be  so  quickly  undermined 
as  by  teaching  the  public  through  the  action  of  a  judge 
himself  that  there  is  reason  for  the  loss  of  such  respect. 
The  judge  who  by  word  or  deed  makes  it  plain  that  the 
corrupt  corporation,  the  law-defying  corporation,  the  law- 
defying  rich  man,  has  in  him  a  sure  and  trustworthy  ally, 
the  judge  who  by  misuse  of  the  process  of  injunction  makes 
it  plain  that  in  him  the  wage-worker  has  a  determined  and 
unscrupulous  enemy,  the  judge  who  when  he  decides  in  an 
employers '  liability  or  a  tenement  house  factory  case  shows 
that  he  has  neither  sympathy  for  nor  understanding  of  those 
fellow-citizens  of  his  who  most  need  his  sympathy  and  un- 


458    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

der standing ;  these  judges  work  as  much  evil  as  if  they  pan 
dered  to  the  mob,  as  if  they  shrank  from  sternly  repressing 
violence  and  disorder.  The  judge  who  does  his  full  duty 
well  stands  higher,  and  renders  a  better  service  to  the  peo 
ple,  than  any  other  public  servant ;  he  is  entitled  to  greater 
respect;  and  if  he  is  a  true  servant  of  the  people,  if  he  is 
upright,  wise  and  fearless,  he  will  unhesitatingly  disregard 
even  the  wishes  of  the  people  if  they  conflict  with  the 
eternal  principles  of  right  as  against  wrong.  He  must 
serve  the  people ;  but  he  must  serve  his  conscience  first.  All 
honor  to  such  a  judge;  and  all  honor  cannot  be  rendered 
him  if  it  is  rendered  equally  to  his  brethren  who  fall 
immeasurably  below  the  high  ideals  for  which  he  stands. 
There  should  be  a  sharp  discrimination  against  such  judges. 
They  claim  immunity  from  criticism,  and  the  claim  is  heat 
edly  advanced  by  men  and  newspapers  like  those  of  whom 
I  speak.  Most  certainly  they  can  claim  immunity  from  un 
truthful  criticism;  and  their  chahipions,  the  newspapers 
and  the  public  men  I  have  mentioned,  exquisitely  illustrate 
by  their  own  actions  mendacious  criticism  in  its  most  fla 
grant  and  iniquitous  form. 

But  no  servant  of  the  people  has  a  right  to  expect  to  be 
free  from  just  and  honest  criticism.  It  is  the  newspapers, 
and  the  public  men  whose  thoughts  and  deeds  show  them  to 
be  most  alien  to  honesty  and  truth  who  themselves  loudly 
object  to  truthful  and  honest  criticism  of  their  fellow-serv 
ants  of  the  great  moneyed  interests. 

We  have  no  quarrel  with  the  individuals,  whether  public 
men,  lawyers  or  editors,  to  whom  I  refer.  These  men  de 
rive  their  sole  power  from  the  great,  sinister  offenders  who 
stand  behind  them.  They  are  but  puppets  who  move  as 
the  strings  are  pulled  by  those  who  control  the  enormous 
masses  of  corporate  wealth  which  if  itself  left  uncontrolled 
threatens  dire  evil  to  the  Republic.  It  is  not  the  puppets, 
but  the  strong,  cunning  men  and  the  mighty  forces  working 
for  evil  behind,  and  to  a  certain  extent  through,  the  puppets, 
with  whom  we  have  to  deal.  We  seek  to  control  law-defying 
wealth,  in  the  first  place  to  prevent  its  doing  evil,  and  in  the 


THE   BIG   STICK   AND    THE    SQUARE   DEAL      459 

next  place  to  avoid  the  vindictive  and  dreadful  radicalism 
which  if  left  uncontrolled  it  is  certain  in  the  end  to  arouse. 
Sweeping  attacks  upon  all  property,  upon  all  men  of  means, 
without  regard  to  whether  they  do  well  or  ill,  would  sound 
the  death-knell  of  the  Republic;  and  such  attacks  become 
inevitable  if  decent  citizens  permit  rich  men  whose  lives  are 
corrupt  and  evil  to  domineer  in  swollen  pride,  unchecked 
and  unhindered,  over  the  destinies  of  this  country.  We  act 
in  no  vindictive  spirit,  and  we  are  no  respecters  of  persons. 
If  a  labor  union  does  what  is  wrong,  we  oppose  it  as  fear 
lessly  as  we  oppose  a  corporation  that  does  wrong;  and  we 
stand  with  equal  stoutness  for  the  rights  of  the  man  of 
wrealth  and  for  the  rights  of  the  wage-workers ;  just  as  much 
so  for  one  as  for  the  other.  We  seek  to  stop  wrongdoing; 
and  we  desire  to  punish  the  wrongdoer  only  so  far  as  is  nec 
essary  in  order  to  achieve  this  end.  We  are  the  stanch  up 
holders  of  every  honest  man,  whether  business  man  or  wage- 
worker. 

I  do  not  for  a  moment  believe  that  our  actions  have 
brought  on  business  distress ;  so  far  as  this  is  due  to  local 
and  not  world- wide  causes,  and  to  the  actions  of  any  partic 
ular  individuals,  it  is  due  to  the  speculative  folly  and  fla 
grant  dishonesty  of  a  few  men  of  great  wealth,  who  now 
seek  to  shield  themselves  from  the  effects  of  their  own 
wrongdoings  by  ascribing  its  results  to  the  actions  of  those 
who  have  sought  to  put  a  stop  to  the  wrongdoing.  But  if  it 
were  true  that  to  cut  out  rottenness  from  the  body  politic 
meant  a  momentary  check  to  an  unhealthy  seeming  pros 
perity,  I  should  not  for  one  moment  hesitate  to  put  the  knife 
to  the  cancer.  On  behalf  of  all  our  people,  on  behalf  no  less 
of  the  honest  man  of  means  than  of  the  honest  man  who 
earns  each  day's  livelihood  by  that  day's  sweat  of  his  brow, 
it  is  necessary  to  insist  upon  honesty  in  business  and  politics 
alike,  in  all  walks  of  life,  in  big  things  and  in  little  things ; 
upon  just  and  fair  dealing  as  between  man  and  man.  We 
are  striving  for  the  right  in  the  spirit  of  Abraham  Lincoln 
when  he  said : 

"Fondly  do  we  hope — fervently  do  Ave  pray — that  this 


460    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

mighty  scourge  may  speedily  pass  away.  Yet,  if  God  wills 
that  it  continue  until  all  the  wealth  piled  by  the  bondsmen's 
two  hundred  and  fifty  years  of  unrequited  toil  shall  be  sunk, 
and  until  every  drop  of  blood  drawn  with  the  lash  shall  be 
paid  by  another  drawn  with  the  sword,  as  was  said  three 
thousand  years  ago,  so  still  it  must  be  said,  'The  judgments 
o('  the  Lord  are  true  and  righteous  altogether.' 

"With  malice  toward  none;  with  charity  for  all;  with 
firmness  in  the  right,  as  God  gives  us  to  see  the  right,  let 
us  strive  on  to  finish  the  work  we  are  in." 

Sincerely  yours, 

THEODORE  ROOSEVELT. 
HON.  CHARLES  J.  BONAPARTE. 
Attorney-General. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

SOCIAL  AND   INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE 

BY  the  time  I  became  President  I  had  grown  to  feel  with 
deep  intensity  of  conviction  that  governmental  agencies 
must  find  their  justification  largely  in  the  way  in  which  they 
are  used  for  the  practical  betterment  of  living  and  working 
conditions  among  the  mass  of  the  people.  I  felt  that  the 
fight  was  really  for  the  abolition  of  privilege;  and  one  of 
the  first  stages  in  the  battle  was  necessarily  to  fight  for  the 
rights  of  the  workingman.  For  this  reason  I  felt  most 
strongly  that  all  that  the  government  could  do  in  the  inter 
est  of  labor  should  be  done.  The  Federal  Government  can 
rarely  act  with  the  directness  that  the  State  governments 
act.  It  can,  however,  do  a  good  deal.  My  purpose  was 
to  make  the  National  Government  itself  a  model  employer 
of  labor,  the  effort  being  to  make  the  per  diem  employee 
just  as  much  as  the  Cabinet  officer  regard  himself  as  one  of 
the  partners  employed  in  the  service  of  the  public,  proud 
of  his  work,  eager  to  do  it  in  the  best  possible  manner,  and 
confident  of  just  treatment.  Our  aim  was  also  to  secure 
good  laws  wherever  the  National  Government  had  power, 
notably  in  the  Territories,  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  and 
in-connection  with  inter-State  commerce.  I  found  the  eight- 
hour  law  a  mere  farce,  the  departments  rarely  enforcing  it 
with  any  degree  of  efficiency.  This  I  remedied  by  executive 
action.  Unfortunately,  thoroughly  efficient  government 
servants  often  proved  to  be  the  prime  offenders  so  far  as 
the  enforcement  of  the  eight-hour  law  was  concerned,  be 
cause  in  their  zeal  to  get  good  work  done  for  the  Govern 
ment  they  became  harsh  taskmasters,  and  declined  to  con 
sider  the  needs  of  their  fellow-employees  who  served  under 
them.  The  more  I  had  studied  the  subject  the  more  strongly 

461 


462    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

I  had  become  convinced  that  an  eight-hour  day  under  the 
conditions  of  labor  in  the  United  States  was  all  that  could, 
with  wisdom  and  propriety,  be  required  either  by  the  Gov 
ernment  or  by  private  employers;  that  more  than  this 
meant,  on  the  average,  a  decrease  in  the  qualities  that  tell 
for  good  citizenship.  I  finally  solved  the  problem,  as  far  as 
Government  employees  were  concerned,  by  calling  in 
Charles  P.  Neill,  the  head  of  the  Labor  Bureau;  and,  acting 
on  his  ^advice,  I  speedily  made  the  eight-hour  law  really 
effective.  Any  man  who  shirked  his  work,  who  dawdled 
and  idled,  received  no  mercy;  slackness  is  even  worse  than 
harshness ;  for  exactly  as  in  battle  mercy  to  the  coward  is 
cruelty  to  the  brave  man,  so  in  civil  life  slackness  towards 
the  vicious  and  idle  is  harshness  towards  the  honest  and 
hardworking. 

We  passed  a  good  law  protecting  the  lives  and  health  of 
miners  in  the  Territories,  and  other  laws  providing  for  the 
supervision  of  employment  agencies  in  the  District  of  Co 
lumbia,  and  protecting  the  health  of  motormen  and  con 
ductors  on  street  railways  in  the  District.  We  practically 
started  the  Bureau  of  Mines.  We  provided  for  safeguard 
ing  factory  employees  in  the  District  against  accidents,  and 
for  the  restriction  of  child  labor  therein.  We  passed  a  work 
men  's  compensation  law  for  the  protection  of  Government 
employees ;  a  law  which  did  not  go  as  far  as  I  wished,  but 
which  was  the  best  I  could  get,  and  which  committed  the 
Government  to  the  right  policy.  We  provided  for  an  inves 
tigation  of  woman  and  child  labor  in  the  United  States.  We 
incorporated  the  National  Child  Labor  Committee.  Where 
we  had  most  difficulty  was  with  the  railway  companies  en 
gaged  in  inter-State  business.  We  passed  an  act  improving 
safety  appliances  on  railway  trains  without  much  opposi 
tion,  but  we  had  more  trouble  with  acts  regulating  the  hours 
of  labor  of  railway  employees  and  making  those  railways 
which  were  engaged  in  inter-State  commerce  liable  for  in 
juries  to  or  the  death  of  their  employees  while  on  duty.  One 
important  step  in  connection  with  these  latter  laws  was 
taken  by  Attorney-General  Moody  when,  on  behalf  of  the 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  463 

Government,  he  intervened  in  the  case  of  a  wronged  em 
ployee.  It  is  unjust  that  a  law  which  has  been  declared  pub 
lic  policy  by  the  representatives  of  the  people  should  be  sub 
mitted  to  the  possibility  of  nullification  because  the  Gov 
ernment  leaves  the  enforcement  of  it  to  the  private  initia 
tive  of  poor  people  who  have  just  suffered  some  crushing 
accident.  It  should  be  the  business  of  the  Government  to 
enforce  laws  of  this  kind,  and  to  appear  in  court  to  argue 
for  their  constitutionality  and  proper  enforcement.  Thanks 
to  Moody,  the  Government  assumed  this  position.  The  first 
employers'  liability  law  affecting  inter-State  railroads  was 
declared  unconstitutional.  We  got  through  another,  which 
stood  the  test  of  the  courts. 

The  principle  to  which  we  especially  strove  to  give  ex 
pression,  through  these  laws  and  through  executive  action, 
was  that  a  right  is  valueless  unless  reduced  from  the  ab 
stract  to  the  concrete.  This  sounds  like  a  truism.  So  far 
from  being  such,  the  effort  practically  to  apply  it  was  al 
most  revolutionary,  and  gave  rise  to  the  bitterest  denuncia 
tion  of  us  by  all  the  big  lawyers,  and  all  the  big  newspaper 
editors,  who,  whether  sincerely  or  for  hire,  gave  expression 
to  the  views  of  the  privileged  classes.  Ever  since  the  Civil 
War  very  many  of  the  decisions  of  the  courts,  not  as  re 
gards  ordinary  actions  between  man  and  man,  but  as  re 
gards  the  application  of  great  governmental  policies  for 
social  and  industrial  justice,  had  been  in  reality  nothing  but 
ingenious  justifications  of  the  theory  that  these  policies 
were  mere  high-sounding  abstractions,  and  were  not  to  be 
given  practical  effect.  The  tendency  of  the  courts  had  been, 
in  the  majority  of  cases,  jealously  to  exert  their  great  power 
in  protecting  those  who  least  needed  protection  and  hardly 
to  use  their  power  at  all  in  the  interest  of  those  who  most 
needed  protection.  Our  desire  was  to  make  the  Federal 
Government  efficient  as  an  instrument  for  protecting  the 
rights  of  labor  within  its  province,  and  therefore  to  secure 
and  enforce  judicial  decisions  which  would  permit  us  to 
make  this  desire  effective.  Not  only  some  of  the  Federal 
judges,  but  some  of  the  State  courts  invoked  the  Constitu- 


464    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

tion  in  a  spirit  of  the  narrowest  legalistic  obstruction  to 
prevent  the  Government  from  acting  in  defense  of  labor  on 
inter-State  railways.  In  effect,  these  judges  took  the  view 
that  while  Congress  had  complete  power  as  regards 
the  goods  transported  by  the  railways,  and  could  protect 
wealthy  or  well-to-do  owners  of  these  goods,  yet  that  it  had 
no  power  to  protect  the  lives  of  the  men  engaged  in  trans 
porting  the  goods.  Such  judges  freely  issued  injunctions 
to  prevent  the  obstruction  of  traffic  in  the  interest  of  the 
property  owners,  but  declared  unconstitutional  the  action  of 
the  Government  in  seeking  to  safeguard  the  men,  and  the 
families  of  the  men,  without  wrhose  labor  the  traffic  could  not 
take  place.  It  was  an  instance  of  the  largely  unconscious 
way  in  which  the  courts  had  been  twisted  into  the  exaltation 
of  property  rights  over  human  rights,  and  the  subordina 
tion  of  the  welfare  of  the  laborer  when  compared  with  the 
profit  of  the  man  for  whom  he  labored.  By  what  I  fear  my 
conservative  friends  regarded  as  frightfully  aggressive  mis 
sionary  work,  which  included  some  uncommonly  plain  speak 
ing  as  to  certain  unjust  and  anti-social  judicial  decisions, 
we  succeeded  in  largely,  but  by  no  means  altogether,  cor 
recting  this  view,  at  least  so  far  as  the  best  and  most  en 
lightened  judges  were  concerned. 

Very  much  the  most  important  action  I  took  as  regards 
labor  had  nothing  to  do  with  legislation,  and  represented 
executive  action  which  was  not  required  by  the  Constitu 
tion.  It  illustrated  as  well  as  anything  that  I  did  the  theory 
which  I  have  called  the  Jackson-Lincoln  theory  of  the  Presi 
dency  ;  that  is,  that  occasionally  great  national  crises  arise 
which  call  for  immediate  and  vigorous  executive  action,  and 
that  in«such  cases  it  is  the  duty  of  the  President  to  act  upon 
the  theory  that  he  is  the  steward  of  the  people,  and  that  the 
proper  attitude  for  him  to  take  is  that  he  is  bound  to  assume 
that  he  has  the  legal  right  to  do  whatever  the  needs  of  the 
people  demand,  unless  the  Constitution  or  the  laws  ex 
plicitly  forbid  him  to  do  it. 

Early  in  the  spring  of  1902  a  universal  strike  began  in 
the  anthracite  regions.  The  miners  and  the  operators  be- 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  465 

came  deeply  embittered,  and  the  strike  went  on  through 
out  the  summer  and  the  early  fall  without  any  sign  of  reach 
ing  an  end,  and  with  almost  complete  stoppage  of  mining. 
In  many  cities,  especially  in  the  East,  the  heating  apparatus 
is  designed  for  anthracite,  so  that  the  bituminous  coal  is 
only  a  very  partial  substitute.  Moreover,  in  many  regions, 
even  in  farmhouses,  many  of  the  provisions  are  for  burn 
ing  coal  and  not  wood.  In  consequence,  the  coal  famine 
became  a  National  menace  as  the  winter  approached.  In 
most  big  cities  and  many  farming  districts  east  of  the  Mis 
sissippi  the  shortage  of  anthracite  threatened  calamity.  In 
the  populous  industrial  States,  from  Ohio  eastward,  it  was 
not  merely  calamity,  but  the  direst  disaster,  that  was 
threatened.  Ordinarily  conservative  men,  men  very  sensi 
tive  as  to  the  rights  of  property  under  normal  conditions, 
when  faced  by  this  crisis  felt,  quite  rightly,  that  there  must 
be  some  .radical  action.  The  Governor  of  Massachusetts 
and  the  Mayor  of  New  York  both  notified  me,  as  the  cold 
weather  came  on,  that  if  the  coal  famine  continued  the 
misery  throughout  the  Northeast,  and  especially  in  the 
great  cities,  would  become  appalling,  and  the  consequent 
public  disorder  so  great  that  frightful  consequences  might 
follow.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  situation  which 
confronted  Pennsylvania,  New  York,  and  New  England, 
and  to  a  less  degree  the  States  of  the  Middle  West,  in 
October,  1902,  was  quite  as  serious  as  if  they  had  been 
threatened  by  the  invasion  of  a  hostile  army  of  overwhelm 
ing  force. 

The  big  coal  operators  had  banded  together,  and  posi 
tively  refused  to  take  any  steps  looking  toward  an  accom 
modation.  They  knew  that  the  suffering  among  the  miners 
was  great ;  they  were  confident  that  if  order  were  kept,  and 
nothing  further  done  by  the  Government,  they  would  win ; 
and  they  refused  to  consider  that  the  public  had  any  rights 
in  the  matter.  They  were,  for  the  most  part,  men  of  un 
questionably  good  private  life,  and  they  were  merely  taking 
the  extreme  individualistic  view  of  the  rights  of  property 
and  the  freedom  of  individual  action  upheld  in  the  laissez- 


466    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

faire  political  economics.  The  mines  were  in  the  State  of 
Pennsylvania.  There  was  no  duty  whatever  laid  upon  me 
by  the  Constitution  in  the  matter,  and  I  had  in  theory  no 
power  to  act  directly  unless  the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania 
or  the  Legislature,  if  it  were  in  session,  should  notify  me 
that  Pennsylvania  could  not  keep  order,  and  request  me  as 
commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of  the  United  States  to  in 
tervene  and  keep  order. 

As  long  as  I  could  avoid  interfering  I  did  so ;  but  I  di 
rected  the  head  of  the  Labor  Bureau,  Carroll  Wright,  to 
make  a  thorough  investigation  and  lay  the  facts  fully  be 
fore  me.  As  September  passed  without  any  sign  of  weak 
ening  either  among  the  employers  or  the  striking  workmen, 
the  situation  became  so  grave  that  I  felt  I  would  have  to 
try  to  do  something.  The  thing  most  feasible  was  to  get 
both  sides  to  agree  to  a  Commission  of  Arbitration,  with  a 
promise  to  accept  its  findings ;  the  miners  to  go  to  work  as 
soon  as  the  commission  was  appointed,  at  the  old  rate  of 
wages.  To  this  proposition  the  miners,  headed  by  John 
Mitchell,  agreed,  stipulating  only  that  I  should  have  power 
to  name  the  Commission.  The  operators,  however,  posi 
tively  refused.  They  insisted  that  all  that  was  necessary 
to  do  was  for  the  State  to  keep  order,  using  the  militia  as 
a  police  force;  although  both  they  and  the  miners  asked 
me  to  intervene  under  the  Inter-State  Commerce  Law,  each 
side  requesting  that  I  proceed  against  the  other,  and  both 
requests  being  impossible. 

Finally,  on  October  3,  the  representatives  of  both  the 
operators  and  the  miners  met  before  me,  in  pursuance  of  my 
request.  The  representatives  of  the  miners  included  as 
their  head  and  spokesman  John  Mitchell,  who  kept  his 
temper  admirably  and  showed  to  much  advantage.  The 
representatives  of  the  operators,  on  the  contrary,  came 
down  in  a  most  insolent  frame  of  mind,  refused  to  talk  of 
arbitration  or  other  accommodation  of  any  kind,  and  used 
language  that  was  insulting  to  the  miners  and  offensive  to 
me.  They  were  curiously  ignorant  of  the  popular  temper ; 
and  when  they  went  awav  from  the  interview  they,  with 


SOCIAL   AND   INDUSTRIAL  JUSTICE  467 

mnch  pride,  gave  their  own  account  of  it  to  the  papers, 
exulting  in  the  fact  that  they  had  "turned  down"  both  the 
miners  and  the  President 

I  refused  to  accept  the  rebuff,  however,  and  continued  the 
effort  to  get  an  agreement  between  the  operators  and  the 
miners.  I  was  anxious  to  get  this  agreement,  because  it 
would  prevent  the  necessity  of  taking  the  extremely  drastic 
action  I  meditated,  and  which  is  hereinafter  described. 

Fortunately,  this  time  we  were  successful.  Yet  we  were 
on  the  verge  of  failure,  because  of  self-willed  obstinacy  on 
the  part  of  the  operators.  This  obstinacy  was  utterly  silly 
from  their  own  standpoint,  and  well-nigh  criminal  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  people  at  large.  The  miners  pro 
posed  that  I  should  name  the  Commission,  and  that  if  I 
put  on  a  representative  of  the  employing  class  I  should  also 
put  on  a  labor  union  man.  The  operators  positively  de 
clined  to  accept  the  suggestion.  They  insisted  upon  my 
naming  a  Commission  of  only  five  men,  and  specified  the 
qualifications  these  men  should  have,  carefully  choosing 
these  qualifications  so  as  to  exclude  those  whom  it  had 
leaked  out  I  was  thinking  of  appointing,  including  ex-Presi 
dent  Cleveland.  They  made  the  condition  that  I  was  to  ap 
point  one  officer  of  the  engineer  corps  of  the  army  or  navy, 
one  man  with  experience  of  mining,  one  "man  of  promi 
nence,"  "eminent  as  a  sociologist,"  one  Federal  judge  of 
the  Eastern  District  of  Pennsylvania,  and  one  mining  engi 
neer. 

They  positively  refused  to  have  me  appoint  any  repre 
sentative  of  labor,  or  to  put  on  an  extra  man.  I  was  desir 
ous  of  putting  on  the  extra  man,  because  Mitchell  and  the 
other  leaders  of  the  miners  had  urged  me  to  appoint  some 
high  Catholic  ecclesiastic.  Most  of  the  miners  were  Cath 
olics,  and  Mitchell  and  the  leaders  were  very  anxious  to 
secure  peaceful  acquiescence  by  the  miners  in  any  decision 
rendered,  and  they  felt  that  their  hands  would  be  strength 
ened  if  such  an  appointment  were  made.  They  also,  quite 
properly,  insisted  that  there  should  be  one  representative 
of  labor  on  the  Commission,  as  all  of  the  others  represented 


468    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

the  propertied  classes.  The  operators,  however,  absolutely 
refused  to  acquiesce  in  the  appointment  of  any  representa 
tive  of  labor,  and  also  announced  that  they  would  refuse  to 
accept  a  sixth  man  on  the  Commission ;  although  they  spoke 
much  less  decidedly  on  this  point.  The  labor  men  left  every 
thing  in  my  hands. 

The  final  conferences  with  the  representatives  of  the 
operators  took  place  in  my  rooms  on  the  evening  of  October 
15.  Hour  after  hour  went  by  while  I  endeavored  to  make 
the  operators  through  their  representatives  see  that  the 
country  would  not  tolerate  their  insisting  upon  such  condi 
tions  ;  but  in  vain.  The  two  representatives  of  the  operators 
were  Eobert  Bacon  and  George  W.  Perkins.  They  were  en 
tirely  reasonable.  But  the  operators  themselves  were  en 
tirely  unreasonable.  They  had  worked  themselves  into  a 
frame  of  mind  where  they  were  prepared  to  sacrifice  every 
thing  and  see  civil  war  in  the  country  rather  than  back 
down  and  acquiesce  in  the  appointment  of  a  representative 
of  labor.  It  looked  as  if  a  deadlock  were  inevitable. 

Then,  suddenly,  after  about  two  hours'  argument,  it 
dawned  on  me  that  they  were  not  objecting  to  the  thing, 
but  to  the  name.  I  found  that  they  did  not  mind  my 
appointing  any  man,  whether  he  was  a  labor  man  or  not, 
so  long  as  he  was  not  appointed  as  a  labor  man,  or  as  a 
representative  of  labor ;  they  did  not  object  to  my  exercising 
any  latitude  I  chose  in  the  appointments  so  long  as  they 
were  made  under  the  headings  they  had  given.  I  shall  never 
forget  the  mixture  of  relief  and  amusement  I  felt  when  I 
thoroughly  grasped  the  fact  that  while  they  would  hero 
ically  submit  to  anarchy  rather  than  have  Tweedledum,  yet 
if  I  would  call  it  Tweedledee  they  would  accept  it  with  rap 
ture  ;  it  gave  me  an  illuminating  glimpse  into  one  corner  of 
the  mighty  brains  of  these  " captains  of  industry."  In 
order  to  carry  the  great  and  vital  point  and  secure  agree 
ment  by  both  parties,  all  that  was  necessary  for  me  to  do 
was  to  commit  a  technical  and  nominal  absurdity  with  a 
solemn  face.  This  I  gladly  did.  I  announced  at  once  that 
I  accepted  the  terms  laid  down.  With  this  understanding, 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  4G9 

I  appointed  the  labor  man  I  had  all  along  had  in  view, 
Mr.  E.  E.  Clark,  the  head  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Railway 
Conductors,  calling  him  an  "eminent  sociologist'7 — a  term 
which  I  doubt  whether  he  had  ever  previously  heard.  He 
was  a  first-class  man,  whom  I  afterward  put  on  the  Inter- 
State  Commerce  Commission.  I  added  to  the  Arbitration 
Commission,  on  my  own  authority,  a  sixth  member,  in  the 
person  of  Bishop  Spalding,  a  Catholic  bishop,  of  Peoria, 
111.,  one  of  the  very  best  men  to  be  found  in  the  entire  coun 
try.  The  man  whom  the  operators  had  expected  me  to 
appoint  as  the  sociologist  was  Carroll  Wright — who  really 
was  an  eminent  sociologist.  I  put  him  on  as  recorder  of  the 
Commission,  and  added  him  as  a  seventh  member  as  soon 
as  the  Commission  got  fairly  started.  In  publishing  the 
list  of  the  Commissioners,  when  I  came  to  Clark's  appoint 
ment,  I  added:  "As  a  sociologist — the  President  assuming 
that  for  the  purposes  of  such  a  Commission,  the  term 
sociologist  means  a  man  who  has  thought  and  studied 
deeply  on  social  questions  and  has  practically  applied  his 
knowledge." 

The  relief  of  the  whole  country  was  so  great  that  the  sud 
den  appearance  of  the  head  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Railway 
Conductors  as  an  "eminent  sociologist"  merely  furnished 
material  for  puzzled  comment  on  the  part  of  the  press.  It 
was  a  most  admirable  Commission.  It  did  a  noteworthy 
work,  and  its  report  is  a  monument  in  the  history  of  the 
relations  of  labor  and  capital  in  this  country.  The  strike, 
by  the  way,  brought  me  into  contact  with  more  than  one 
man  who  was  afterward  a  valued  friend  and  fellow- worker. 
On  the  suggestion  of  Carroll  Wright  I  appointed  as  assist 
ant  recorders  to  the  Commission  Charles  P.  Neill,  whom 
I  afterward  made  Labor  Commissioner,  to  succeed  Wright 
himself,  and  Mr.  Edward  A.  Moseley.  Wilkes-Barre  was 
the  center  of  the  strike ;  and  the  man  in  Wilkes-Barre  who 
helped  me  most  was  Father  Curran;  I  grew  to  know  and 
trust  and  believe  in  him,  and  throughout  my  term  in  office, 
and  afterward,  he  was  not  only  my  stanch  friend,  but  one 
of  the  men  by  whos&  advice  and  counsel  I  profited  most 


470    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

in  matters  affecting  the  welfare  of  the  miners  and  their 
families. 

I  was  greatly  relieved  at  the  result,  for  more  than  one 
reason.  Of  course,  first  and  foremost,  my  concern  was  to 
avert  a  frightful  calamity  to  the  United  States.  In  the 
next  place  I  was  anxious  to  save  the  great  coal  operators 
and  all  of  the  class  of  big  propertied  men,  of  which  they 
were  members,  from  the  dreadful  punishment  which  their 
own  folly  would  have  brought  on  them  if  I  had  not  acted; 
and  one  of  the  exasperating  things  was  that  they  were  so 
blinded  that  they  could  not  see  that  I  was  trying  to  save 
them  from  themselves  and  to  avert,  not  only  for  their  sakes, 
but  for  the  sake  of  the  country,  the  excesses  which  would 
have  been  indulged  in  at  their  expense  if  they  had  longer 
persisted  in  their  conduct. 

The  great  Anthracite  Strike  of  1902  left  an  indelible  im 
press  upon  the  people  of  the  United  States.  It  showed 
clearly  to  all  wise  and  far-seeing  men  that  the  labor  problem 
in  this  country  had  entered  upon  a  new  phase.  Industry 
had  grown.  Great  financial  corporations,  doing  a  nation 
wide  and  even  a  world-wide  business,  had  taken  the  place 
of  the  smaller  concerns  of  an  earlier  time.  The  old  famil 
iar,  intimate  relations  between  employer  and  employee  were 
passing.  A  few  generations  before,  the  boss  had  known 
every  man  in  his  shop ;  he  called  his  men  Bill,  Tom,  Dick, 
John ;  he  inquired  after  their  wives  and  babies ;  he  swapped 
jokes  and  stories  and  perhaps  a  bit  of  tobacco  with  them. 
In  the  small  establishment  there  had  been  a  friendly  human 
relationship  between  employer  and  employee. 

There  was  no  such  relation  between  the  great  railway 
magnates,  who  controlled  the  anthracite  industry,  and  the 
one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men  who  worked  in  their 
mines,  or  the  half  million  women  and  children  who  were 
dependent  upon  these  miners  for  their  daily  bread.  Very 
few  of  these  mine  workers  had  ever  seen,  for  instance,  the 
president  of  the  Beading  Railroad.  Had  they  seen  him 
many  of  them  could  not  have  spoken  to  him,  for  tens  of 

thousands  of  the  mine  workers  were  recent  immigrants 
i  i  L* 


SOCIAL   AND   INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  471 

who  did  not  understand  the  language  which  he  spoke  and 
who  spoke  a  language  which  he  could  not  understand. 

Again,  a  few  generations  ago  an  American  workman 
could  have  saved  money,  gone  West  and  taken  up  a  home 
stead.  Now  the  free  lands  were  gone.  In  earlier  days  a 
man  who  began  with  pick  and  shovel  might  have  come  to 
own  a  mine.  That  outlet  too  was  now  closed,  as  regards  the 
immense  majority,  and  few,  if  any,  of  the  one  hundred  and 
fifty  thousand  mine  workers  could  ever  aspire  to  enter  the 
small  circle  of  men  who  held  in  their  grasp  the  great  an 
thracite  industry.  The  majority  of  the  men  who  earned 
wages  in  the  coal  industry,  if  they  wished  to  progress  at  all, 
were  compelled  to  progress  not  by  ceasing  to  be  wage- 
earners,  but  by  improving  the  conditions  under  which  all 
the  wage-earners  in  all  the  industries  of  the  country  lived 
and  worked,  as  well  of  course,  as  improving  their  own  in 
dividual  efficiency. 

Another  change  which  had  come  about  as  a  result  of  the 
foregoing  was  a  crass  inequality  in  the  bargaining  relation 
between  the  employer  and  the  individual  employee  standing 
alone.    The  great  coal-mining  and  coal-carrying  companies, 
which  employed  their  tens  of  thousands,  could  easily  dis 
pense  with  the  services  of  any  particular  miner.  The  miner, 
on  the  other  hand,  however  expert,  could  not  dispense  with 
the  companies.    He  needed  a  job;  his  wife  and  children 
would  starve  if  he  did  not  get  one.    What  the  miner  had  to 
sell — his  labor — was  a  perishable  commodity;  the  labor  of 
to-day — if  not  sold  to-day — was  lost  forever.    Moreover, 
his  labor  was  not  like  most  commodities — a  mere  thing;  it 
was  part  of  a  living,  breathing  human  being.    The  work 
man  saw,  and  all  citizens  who  gave  earnest  thought  to  the 
matter  saw,  that  the  labor  problem  was  not  only  an  eco 
nomic,  but  also  a  moral,  a  human  problem.    Individually 
the  miners  were  impotent  when  they  sought  to  enter  a  wage- 
contract  with  the  great  companies;  they  could  make  fair 
terms  only  by  uniting  into  trade  unions  to  bargain  col 
lectively.    The  men  were  forced  to  cooperate  to  secure  not 
only  their  economic,  but  their  simple  human  rights.    They, 


472    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

like  other  workmen,  were  compelled  by  the  very  conditions 
under  which  they  lived  to  unite  in  unions  of  their  industry 
or  trade,  and  these  unions  were  bound  to  grow  in  size,  in 
strength,  and  in  power  for  good  and  evil  as  the  industries 
in  which  the  men  were  employed  grew  larger  and  larger. 

A  democracy  can  be  such  in  fact  only  if  there  is  some 
rough  approximation  to  similarity  in  stature  among  the 
men  composing  it.  One  of  us  can  deal  in  our  private  lives 
with  the  grocer  or  the  butcher  or  the  carpenter  or  the 
chicken  raiser,  or  if  we  are  the  grocer  or  carpenter  or 
butcher  or  farmer,  we  can  deal  with  our  customers,  be 
cause  ive  are  all  of  about  the  same  size.  Therefore  a  simple 
and  poor  society  can  exist  as  a  democracy  on  a  basis  of  sheer 
individualism.  But  a  rich  and  complex  industrial  society 
cannot  so  exist;  for  some  individuals,  and  especially  those 
artificial  individuals  called  corporations,  become  so  very 
big  that  the  ordinary  individual  is  utterly  dwarfed  beside 
them,  and  cannot  deal  with  them  on  terms  of  equality.  It 
therefore  becomes  necessary  for  these  ordinary  individuals 
to  combine  in  their  turn,  first  in  order  to  act  in  their  col 
lective  capacity  through  that  biggest  of  all  combinations 
called  the  Government,  and  second,  to  act,  also  in  their  own 
self-defense,  through  private  combinations,  such  as  farmers ' 
associations  and  trade  unions. 

This  the  great  coal  operators  did  not  see.  They  did  not 
see  that  their  property  rights,  which  they  so  stoutly  de 
fended,  were  of  the  same  texture  as  were  the  human  rights, 
which  they  so  blindly  and  hotly  denied.  They  did  not  see 
that  the  power  which  they  exercised  by  representing  their 
stockholders  was  of  the  same  texture  as  the  power  which 
the  union  leaders  demanded  of  representing  the  workmen, 
who  had  democratically  elected  them.  They  did  not  see 
that  the  right  to  use  one 's  property  as  one  will  can  be  main 
tained  only  so  long  as  it  is  consistent  with  the  maintenance 
of  certain  fundamental  human  rights,  of  the  rights  to  life, 
liberty  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness,  or,  as  we  may  re 
state  them  in  these  later  days,  of  the  rights  of  the  worker  to 
a  living  wage,  to  reasonable  hours  of  labor,  to  decent  work- 


SOCIAL    AND    INDUSTRIAL    JUSTICE  473 

ing  and  living  conditions,  to  freedom  of  thought  and  speech 
and  industrial  representation, — in  short,  to  a  measure  of  in 
dustrial  democracy  and,  in  return  for  his  arduous  toil,  to  a 
worthy  and  decent  life  according  to  American  standards. 
Still  another  thing  these  great  business  leaders  did  not  see. 
They  did  not  see  that  both  their  interests  and  the  interests 
of  the  workers  must  be  accommodated,  and  if  need  be,  sub 
ordinated,  to  the  fundamental  permanent  interests  of  the 
whole  community.  No  man  and  no  group  of  men  may  so 
exercise  their  rights  as  to  deprive  the  nation  of  the  things 
which  are  necessary  and  vital  to  the  common  life.  A  strike 
which  ties  up  the  coal  supplies  of  a  whole  section  is  a  strike 
invested  with  a  public  interest. 

So  great  was  that  public  interest  in  the  Coal  Strike  of 
1902,  so  deeply  and  strongly  did  I  feel  tlie  wave  of  indigna 
tion  which  swept  over  the  whole  country  that  had  I  not  suc 
ceeded  in  my  efforts  to  induce  the  operators  to  listen  to  rea 
son,  I  should  reluctantly  but  none  the  less  decisively  have 
taken  a  step  which  would  have  brought  down  upon  my  head 
the  execrations  of  many  of  "the  captains  of  industry, "  as 
well  as  of  sundry  "respectable"  newspapers  who  dutifully 
take  their  cue  from  them.  As  a  man  should  be  judged  by 
his  intentions  as  well  as  by  his  actions,  I  will  give  here  the 
story  of  the  intervention  that  never  happened. 

While  the  coal  operators  were  exulting  over  the  fact  that 
they  had  "turned  down"  the  miners  and  the  President, 
there  arose  in  all  parts  of  the  country  an  outburst  of  wrath 
so  universal  that  even  so  naturally  conservative  a  man  as 
Grover  Cleveland  wrote  to  me,  expressing  his  sympathy 
with  the  course  I  was  following,  his  indignation  at  the  con 
duct  of  the  operators,  and  his  hope  that  I  would  devise 
some  method  of  effective  action.  In  my  own  mind  I  was 
already  planning  effective  action;  but  it  was  of  a  very 
drastic  character,  and  I  did  not  wish  to  take  it  until  the  fail 
ure  of  all  other  expedients  had  rendered  it  necessary.  Above 
all,  I  did  not  wish  to  talk  about  it  until  and  unless  I  actually 
acted.  I  had  definitely  determined  that  somehow  or  other 
.act  I  would,  that  somehow  or  other  the  coal  famine  should 


474    THEODORE   KOOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

be  broken.  To  accomplish  this  end  it  was  necessary  that 
the  mines  should  be  run,  and,  if  I  could  get  no  voluntary 
agreement  between  the  contending  sides,  that  an  Arbitra 
tion  Commission  should  be  appointed  which  would  command 
such  public  confidence  as  to  enable  me,  without  too  much 
difficulty,  to  enforce  its  terms  upon  both  parties.  Ex-Presi 
dent  Cleveland's  letter  not  merely  gratified  me,  but  gave 
me  the  chance  to  secure  him  as  head  of  the  Arbitration  Com 
mission.  I  at  once  wrote  him,  stating  that  I  would  very 
probably  have  to  appoint  an  Arbitration  Commission  or  In 
vestigating  Commission  to  look  into  the  matter  and  decide 
on  the  rights  of  the  case,  whether  or  not  the  operators  asked 
for  or  agreed  to  abide  by  the  decisions  of  such  a  Commis 
sion  ;  and  that  I  would  ask  him  to  accept  the  chief  place  on 
the  Commission.  He  answered  that  he  would  do  so.  I 
picked  out  several  first-class  men  for  other  positions  on  the 
Commission. 

Meanwhile  the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania  had  all  the 
Pennsylvania  militia  in  the  anthracite  region,  although 
without  any  effect  upon  the  resumption  of  mining.  The 
method  of  action  upon  which  I  had  determined  in  the  last 
resort  was  to  get  the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania  to  ask  me 
to  keep  order.  Then  I  would  put  in  the  army  under  the 
command  of  some  first-rate  general.  I  would  instruct  this 
general  to  keep  absolute  order,  taking  any  steps  whatever 
that  was  necessary  to  prevent  interference  by  the  strikers 
or  their  sympathizers  with  men  who  wanted  to  work.  I 
would  also  instruct  him  to  dispossess  the  operators  and  run 
the  mines  as  a  receiver  until  such  time  as  the  Commission 
might  make  its  report,  and  until  I,  as  President,  might  issue 
further  orders  in  view  of  this  report.  I  had  to  find  a  man 
who  possessed  the  necessary  good  sense,  judgment,  and 
nerve  to  act  in  such  event.  He  was  ready  to  hand  in  the 
person  of  Major-General  Schofield.  I  sent  for  him,  telling 
him  that  if  I  had  to  make  use  of  him  it  would  be  because 
the  crisis  was  only  less  serious  than  that  of  the  Civil  War, 
that  the  action  taken  would  be  practically  a  war  measure, 
and  that  if  I  sent  him  he  must  act  in  a  purely  military  ca- 


SOCIAL   AND   INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  475 

pacity  under  me  as  commander-in-chief,  paying  no  heed  to 
any  authority,  judicial  or  otherwise,  except  mine.  He  was 
a  fine  fellow — a  most  respectable-looking  old  boy,  with  side 
whiskers  and  a  black  skull-cap,  without  any  of  the  outward 
aspect  of  the  conventional  military  dictator;  but  in  both 
nerve  and  judgment  he  was  all  right,  and  he  answered 
quietly  that  if  I  gave  the  order  he  would  take  possession  of 
the  mines,  and  would  guarantee  to  open  them  and  to  run 
them  without  permitting  any  interference  either  by  the 
owners  or  the  strikers  or  anybody  else,  so  long  as  I  told  him 
to  stay.  I  then  saw  Senator  Quay,  who,  like  every  other  re 
sponsible  man  in  high  position,  was  greatly  wrought  up 
over  the  condition  of  things.  I  told  him  that  he  need  be 
under  no  alarm  as  to  the  problem  not  being  solved,  that  I 
was  going  to  make  another  effort  to  get  the  operators  and 
miners  to  come  together,  but  that  I  would  solve  the  prob 
lem  in  any  event  and  get  coal ;  that,  however,  I  did  not  wish 
to  tell  him  anything  of  the  details  of  my  intention,  but 
merely  to  have  him  arrange  that  whenever  I  gave  the  word 
the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania  should  request  me  to  inter 
vene  ;  that  when  this  was  done  I  would  be  responsible  for  all 
that  followed,  and  would  guarantee  that  the  coal  famine 
would  end  forthwith.  The  Senator  made  no  inquiry  or  com 
ment,  and  merely  told  me  that  he  in  his  turn  would  guaran 
tee  that  the  Governor  would  request  my  intervention  the 
minute  I  asked  that  the  request  be  made. 

These  negotiations  were  conducted  with  the  utmost 
secrecy,  General  Schofield  being  the  only  man  who  knew 
exactly  what  my  plan  was,  and  Senator  Quay,  two  mem 
bers  of  my  Cabinet,  and  ex-President  Cleveland  and  the 
other  men  whom  I  proposed  to  put  on  the  Commission,  the 
only  other  men  who  knew  that  I  had  a  plan.  As  I  have 
above  outlined,  my  efforts  to  bring  about  an  agreement  be 
tween  the  operators  and  miners  were  finally  successful  I 
was  glad  not  to  have  to  take  possession  of  the  mines  on  my 
own  initiative  by  means  of  General  Schofield  and  the  regu 
lars.  I  was  all  ready  to  act,  and  w^ould  have  done  so  with 
out  the  slightest  hesitation  or  a  moment's  delay  if  the  ne- 


476    THEODORE    KOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

gotiations  had  fallen  through.  And  my  action  would  have 
been  entirely  effective.  But  it  is  never  well  to  take  drastic 
action  if  the  result  can  be  achieved  with  equal  efficiency  in 
less  drastic  fashion;  and,  although  this  was  a  minor  con 
sideration,  I  was  personally  saved  a  good  deal  of  future 
trouble  by  being  able  to  avoid  this  drastic  action.  At  the 
time  I  should  have  been  almost  unanimously  supported. 
With  the  famine  upon  them  the  people  would  not  have  toler 
ated  any  conduct  that  would  have  thwarted  what  I  was  do 
ing.  Probably  no  man  in  Congress,  and  no  man  in  the  Penn 
sylvania  State  Legislature,  would  have  raised  his  voice 
against  me.  Although  there  would  have  been  plenty  of 
muttering,  nothing  would  have  been  done  to  interfere  with 
the  solution  of  the  problem  which  I  had  devised,  until  the 
solution  was  accomplished  and  the  problem  ceased  to  be  a 
problem.  Once  this  was  done,  and  when  people  were  no 
longer  afraid  of  a  coal  famine,  and  began  to  forget  that 
they  ever  had  been  afraid  of  it,  and  to  be  indifferent  as  re 
gards  the  consequences  to  those  who  put  an  end  to  it,  then 
my  enemies  would  have  plucked  up  heart  and  begun  a  cam 
paign  against  me.  I  doubt  if  they  could  have  accomplished 
much  anyway,  for  the  only  effective  remedy  against  me 
would  have  been  impeachment,  and  that  they  would  not  have 
ventured  to  try.1 

i  One  of  my  appointees  on  the  Anthracite  Strike  Commission  was  Judge 
George  Gray,  of  Delaware,  a  Democrat  whose  standing  in  the  country  was 
second  only  to  that  of  Grover  Cleveland.  A  year  later  he  commented  on  my 
action  as  follows: 

"I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  President  of  the  United  States  was 
confronted  in  October,  1902,  by  the  existence  of  a  crisis  more  grave  and 
threatening  than  any  that  had  occurred  since  the  Civil  War.  I  mean  that 
the  cessation  of  mining  in  the  anthracite  country,  brought  about  by  the  dis 
pute  between  the  miners  and  those  who  controlled  the  greatest  natural  monopoly 
in  this  country  and  perhaps  in  the  world,  had  brought  upon  more  than  one- 
half  of  the  American  people  a  condition  of  deprivation  of  one  of  the  necessaries 
of  life,  and  the  probable  continuance  of  the  dispute  threatened  not  only  the 
comfort  and  health,  but  the  safety  and  good  order,  of  the  nation.  He  was 
without  legal  or  constitutional  power  to  interfere,  but  his  position  as  Presi 
dent  of  the  United  States  gave  him  an  influence,  a  leadership,  as  first  citizen 
of  the  republic,  that  enabled  him  to  appeal  to  the  patriotism  and  good  sense  of 
the  parties  to  the  controversy  and  to  place  upon  them  the  moral  coercion  of 
public  opinion  to  agree  to  an  arbitrament  of  the  strike  then  existing  and 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  477 

They  would  doubtless  have  acted  precisely  as  they  acted 
as  regards  the  acquisition  of  the  Panama  Canal  Zone  in 
1903,  and  the  stoppage  of  the  panic  of  1907  by  my  action  in 
the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Company  matter.  Nothing 
eould  have  made  the  American  people  surrender  the  canal 
zone.  But  after  it  was  an  accomplished  fact,  and  the  canal 
was  under  way,  then  they  settled  down  to  comfortable  ac 
ceptance  of  the  accomplished  fact,  and  as  their  own  inter 
ests  were  no  longer  in  jeopardy,  they  paid  no  heed  to  the 
men  who  attacked  me  because  of  what  I  had  done — and  also 
continue  to  attack  me,  although  they  are  exceedingly  care 
ful  not  to  propose  to  right  the  " wrong,"  in  the  only  proper 
way  if  it  really  was  a  wrong,  by  replacing  the  old  Republic 
of  Panama  under  the  tyranny  of  Colombia  and  giving  Co 
lombia  sole  or  joint  ownership  of  the  canal  itself.  In  the 
case  of  the  panic  of  1907  (as  in  the  case  of  Panama),  what 
I  did  was  not  only  done  openly,  but  depended  for  its  effect 
upon  being  done  openly  and  with  the  widest  advertisement. 
Nobody  in  Congress  ventured  to  make  an  objection  at  the 
time.  No  serious  leader  outside  made  any  objection.  The 
one  concern  of  everybody  was  to  stop  the  panic,  and  every 
body  was  overjoyed  that  I  was  willing  to  take  the  responsi 
bility  of  stopping  it  upon  my  own  shoulders.  But  a  few 
months  afterward,  the  panic  was  a  thing  of  the  past.  People 
forgot  the  frightful  condition  of  alarm  in  which  they  had 
been.  They  no  longer  had  a  personal  interest  in  preventing 
any  interference  with  the  stoppage  of  the  panic.  Then  the 
men  who  had  not  dared  to  raise  their  voices  until  all  danger 

threatening  consequences  so  direful  to  the  whole  country.  He  acted  promptly 
and  courageously,  and  in  so  doing  averted  the  dangers  to  which  I  have  alluded. 

"So  far  from  interfering  or  infringing  upon  property  rights,  the  President's 
action  tended  to  conserve  them.  The  peculiar  situation,  as  regards  the 
anthracite  coal  interest,  was  that  they  controlled  a  natural  monopoly  of  a 
product  necessary  to  the  comfort  and  to  the  very  life  of  a  large  portion  of  the 
people.  A  prolonged  deprivation  of  the  enjoyment  of  this  necessary  of  life 
would  have  tended  to  precipitate  an  attack  upon  these  property  rights  of 
which  you  speak;  for,  after  all,  it  is  vain  to  deny  that  this  property,  so  pe 
culiar  in  its  conditions,  and  which  is  property  spoken  of  as  a  natural  monopoly, 
is  affected  with  a  public  interest. 

"I  do  not  think  that  any  President  ever  acted  more  wisely,  courageously  or 
promptly  in  a  national  crisis.  Mr.  Roosevelt  deserves  unstinted  praise  for 
what  he  did." 


478    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

was  past  came  bravely  forth  from  their  hiding  places  and 
denounced  the  action  which  had  saved  them.  They  had 
kept  a  hushed  silence  when  there  was  danger;  they  made 
clamorous  outcry  when  there  was  safety  in  doing  so. 

Just  the  same  course  would  have  been  followed  in  con 
nection  with  the  Anthracite  Coal  Strike  if  I  had  been 
obliged  to  act  in  the  fashion  I  intended  to  act  had  I  failed  to 
secure  a  voluntary  agreement  between  the  miners  and  the 
operators.  Even  as  it  was,  my  action  was  remembered  with 
rancor  by  the  heads  of  the  great  moneyed  interests ;  and  as 
time  went  by  was  assailed  with  constantly  increasing  vigor 
by  the  newspapers  these  men  controlled.  Had  I  been  forced 
to  take  possession  of  the  mines,  these  men  and  the  poli 
ticians  hostile  to  me  would  have  waited  until  the  popular 
alarm  was  over  and  the  popular  needs  met,  just  as  they 
waited  in  the  case  of  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Company; 
and  then  they  would  have  attacked  me  precisely  as  they  did 
attack  me  as  regards  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Com 
pany. 

Of  course,  in  labor  controversies  it  was  not  always  possi 
ble  to  champion  the  cause  of  the  workers,  because  in  many 
cases  strikes  were  called  which  were  utterly  unwarranted 
and  were  fought  by  methods  which  cannot  be  too  harshly 
condemned.  No  straightforward  man  can  believe,  and  no 
fearless  man  will  assert,  that  a  trade  union  is  always  right. 
That  man  is  an  unworthy  public  servant  who  by  speech  or 
silence,  by  direct  statement  or  cowardly  evasion,  invariably 
throws  the  weight  of  his  influence  on  the  side  of  the  trade 
union,  whether  it  is  right  or  wrong.  It  has  occasionally 
been  my  duty  to  give  utterance  to  the  feelings  of  all  right 
thinking  men  by  expressing  the  most  emphatic  disapproval 
of  unwise  or  even  immoral  actions  by  representatives  of 
labor.  The  man  is  no  true  democrat,  and  if  an  American, 
is  unworthy  of  the  traditions  of  his  country  who,  in  prob 
lems  calling  for  the  exercise  of  a  moral  judgment,  fails  to 
take  his  stand  on  conduct  and  not  on  class.  There  are 
good  and  bad  wage-workers  just  as  there  are  good  and  bad 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  479 

employers,  and  good  and  bad  men  of  small  means  and  of 
large  means  alike. 

But  a  willingness  to  do  equal  and  exact  justice  to  all 
citizens,  irrespective  of  race,  creed,  section  or  economic  in 
terest  and  position,  does  not  imply  a  failure  to  recognize  the 
enormous  economic,  political  and  moral  possibilities  of  the 
trade  union.  Just  as  democratic  government  cannot  be 
condemned  because  of  errors  and  even  crimes  committed 
by  men  democratically  elected,  so  trade-unionism  must  not 
be  condemned  because  of  errors  or  crimes  of  occasional 
trade-union  leaders.  The  problem  lies  deeper.  While  we 
must  repress  all  illegalities  and  discourage  all  immoralities, 
whether  of  labor  organizations  or  of  corporations,  we  must 
recognize  the  fact  that  to-day  the  organization  of  labor  into 
trade  unions  and  federations  is  necessary,  is  beneficent, 
and  is  one  of  the  greatest  possible  agencies  in  the  attain 
ment  of  a  true  industrial,  as  well  as  a  true  political,  democ 
racy  in  the  United  States. 

This  is  a  fact  which  many  well-intentioned  people  even 
to-day  do  not  understand.  They  do  not  understand  that 
the  labor  problem  is  a  human  and  a  moral  as  well  as  an  eco 
nomic  problem ;  that  a  fall  in  wages,  an  increase  in  hours,  a 
deterioration  of  labor  conditions  mean  wholesale  moral  as 
well  as  economic  degeneration,  and  the  needless  sacrifice 
of  human  lives  and  human  happiness,  while  a  rise  of  wages, 
a  lessening  of  hours,  a  bettering  of  conditions,  mean  an  in 
tellectual,  moral  and  social  uplift  of  millions  of  American 
men  and  women.  There  are  employers  to-day  who,  like  the 
great  coal  operators,  speak  as  though  they  were  lords  of 
these  countless  armies  of  Americans,  who  toil  in  factory,  in 
shop,  in  mill  and  in  the  dark  places  under  the  earth.  They 
fail  to  see  that  all  these  men  have  the  right  and  the  duty  to 
combine  to  protect  themselves  and  their  families  from  want 
and  degradation.  They  fail  to  see  that  the  Nation  and  the 
Government,  within  the  range  of  fair  play  and  a  just  ad 
ministration  of  the  law,  must  inevitably  sympathize  with 
the  men  who  have  nothing  but  their  wages,  with  the  men 
who  are  struggling  for  a  decent  life,  as  opposed  to  men, 


480    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

however  honorable,  who  are  merely  fighting  for  larger 
profits  and  an  autocratic  control  of  big  business.  Each 
man  should  have  all  he  earns,  whether  by  brain  or  body; 
and  the  director,  the  great  industrial  leader,  is  one  of  the 
greatest  of  earners,  and  should  have  a  proportional  reward ; 
but  no  man  should  live  on  the  earnings  of  another,  and  there 
should  not  be  too  gross  inequality  between  service  and 
reward. 

There  are  many  men  to-day,  men  of  integrity  and  intelli 
gence,  who  honestly  believe  that  we  must  go  back  to  the 
tabor  conditions  of  half  a  century  ago.  They  are  opposed 
to  trade  unions,  root  and  branch.  They  note  the  unworthy 
conduct  of  many  labor  leaders,  they  find  instances  of  bad 
work  by  union  men,  of  a  voluntary  restriction  of  output,  of 
vexatious  and  violent  strikes,  of  jurisdictional  disputes  be 
tween  unions  which  often  disastrously  involve  the  best  in- 
tentioned  and  fairest  of  employers.  All  these  things  occur 
and  should  be  repressed.  But  the  same  critic  of  the  trade 
union  might  find  equal  cause  of  complaint  against  individ 
ual  employers  of  labor,  or  even  against  great  associations 
of  manufacturers.  He  might  find  many  instances  of  an  un 
warranted  cutting  of  wages,  of  flagrant  violations  of  factory 
laws  and  tenement  house  laws,  of  the  deliberate  and  sys 
tematic  cheating  of  employees  by  means  of  truck  stores,  of 
the  speeding  up  of  work  to  a  point  which  is  fatal  to  the 
health  of  the  workman,  of  the  sweating  of  foreign-born 
workers,  of  the  drafting  of  feeble  little  children  into  dusty 
workshops,  of  black-listing,  of  putting  spies  into  union 
meetings  and  of  the  employment  in  strike  times  of  vicious 
and  desperate  ruffians,  who  are  neither  better  nor  worse 
than  are  the  thugs  who  are  occasionally  employed  by  unions 
under  the  sinister  name,  "entertainment  committees."  I 
believe  that  the  overwhelming  majority,  both  of  workmen 
and  of  employers,  are  law-abiding,  peaceful,  and  honorable 
citizens,  and  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  just  to  lay  up  the  errors 
and  wrongs  of  individuals  to  the  entire  group  to  which  they 
belong.  I  also  think — and  this  is  a  belief  which  has  been 
borne  upon  me  through  many  years  of  practical  experience 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL    JUSTICE  481 

— that  the  trade  union  is  growing  constantly  in -wisdom  as 
well  as  in  power,  and  is  becoming  one  of  the  most  efficient 
agencies  toward  the  solution  of  our  industrial  problems, 
the  elimination  of  poverty  and  of  industrial  disease  and  ac 
cidents,  the  lessening  of  unemployment,  the  achievement  of 
industrial  democracy  and  the  attainment  of  a  larger  meas 
ure  of  social  and  industrial  justice. 

If  I  were  a  factory  employee,  a  workman  on  the  railroads 
or  a  wage-earner  of  any  sort,  I  would  undoubtedly  join  the 
union  of  my  trade.  If  I  disapproved  of  its  policy,  I  would 
join  in  order  to  fight  that  policy ;  if  the  union  leaders  were 
dishonest,  I  would  join  in  order  to  put  them  out.  I  believe 
in  the  union  and  I  believe  that  all  men  who  are  benefited 
by  the  union  are  morally  bound  to  help  to  the  extent  of  their 
power  in  the  common  interests  advanced  by  the  union. 
Nevertheless,  irrespective  of  whether  a  man  should  or 
should  not,  and  does  or  does  not,  join  the  union  of  his  trade, 
all  the  rights,  privileges  and  immunities  of  that  man  as  an 
American  and  as  a  citizen  should  be  safeguarded  and  up 
held  by  the  law.  We  dare  not  make  an  outlaw  of  any  in 
dividual  or  any  group,  whatever  his  or  its  opinions  or 
professions.  The  non-unionist,  like  the  unionist,  must  be 
protected  in  all  his  legal  rights  by  the  full  weight  and 
power  of  the  law. 

This  question  came  up  before  me  in  the  shape  of  the  right 
of  a  non-union  printer  named  Miller  to  hold  his  position  in 
the  Government  Printing  Office.  As  I  said  before,  I  believe 
in  trade  unions.  I  always  prefer  to  see  a  union  shop.  But 
my  private  preferences  cannot  control  my  public  actions. 
The  Government  can  recognize  neither  union  men  nor  non 
union  men  as  such,  and  is  bound  to  treat  both  exactly  alike. 
In  the  Government  Printing  Office  not  many  months  prior 
to  the  opening  of  the  Presidential  campaign  of  1904,  when  I 
was  up  for  reelection,  I  discovered  that  a  man  had  been  dis 
missed  because  he  did  not  belong  to  the  union.  I  reinstated 
him.  Mr.  Gompers,  the  President  of  the  American  Federa 
tion  of  Labor,  with  various  members  of  the  executive  conn- 


482    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

cil  of  that  body,  called  upon  me  to  protest  on  September  29, 
1903,  and  I  answered  them  as  follows : 

"I  thank  you  and  your  committee  for  your  courtesy,  and 
I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  meet  with  you.  It  will  al 
ways  be  a  pleasure  to  see  you  or  any  representative  of  your 
organizations  or  of  your  Federation  as  a  whole. 

4 'As  regards  the  Miller  case,  I  have  little  to  add  to  what 
I  have  already  said.  In  dealing  with  it  I  ask  you  to  re 
member  that  I  am  dealing  purely  with  the  relation  of  the 
Government  to  its  employees.  I  must  govern  my  action  by 
the  laws  of  the  land,  which  I  am  sworn  to  administer,  and 
which  differentiate  any  case  in  which  the  Government  of 
the  United  States  is  a  party  from  all  other  cases  whatsoever. 
These  laws  are  enacted  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  people, 
and  cannot  and  must  not  be  construed  as  permitting  dis 
crimination  against  some  of  the  people.  I  am  President  of 
all  the  people  of  the  United  States,  without  regard  to  creed, 
color,  birthplace,  occupation  or  social  condition.  My  aim 
is  to  do  equal  and  exact  justice  as  among  them  all.  In  the 
employment  and  dismissal  of  men  in  the  Government  serv 
ice  I  can  no  more  recognize  the  fact  that  a  man  does  or  does 
not  belong  to  a  union  as  being  for  or  against  him  than  I 
can  recognize  the  fact  that  he  is  a  Protestant  or  a  Catholic, 
a  Jew  or  a  Gentile,  as  being  for  or  against  him. 

"In  the  communications  sent  me  by  various  labor  or 
ganizations  protesting  against  the  retention  of  Miller  in 
the  Government  Printing  Office,  the  grounds  alleged  are 
twofold:  1,  that  he  is  a  non-union  man;  2,  that  he  is  not 
personally  fit.  The  question  of  his  personal  fitness  is  one 
to  be  settled  in  the  routine  of  administrative  detail,  and 
cannot  be  allowed  to  conflict  with  or  to  complicate  the  larger 
question  of  governmental  discrimination  for  or  against  him 
or  any  other  man  because  he  is  or  is  not  a  member  of 
a  union.  This  is  the  only  question  now  before  me  for 
decision;  and  as  to  this  my  decision  is  final." 

Because  of  things  I  have  done  on  behalf  of  justice  to  the 
workingman,  I  have  often  been  called  a  Socialist.  Usually 
I  have  not  taken  the  trouble  even  to  notice  the  epithet. 


SOCIAL  AND   INDUSTRIAL  JUSTICE  483 

I  am  not  afraid  of  names,  and  I  am  not  one  of  those  who 
fear  to  do  what  is  right  because  some  one  else  will  confound 
me  with  partisans  with  whose  principles  I  am  not  in  accord. 
Moreover,  I  know  that  many  American  Socialists  are  high- 
minded  and  honorable  citizens,  who  in  reality  are  merely 
radical  social  reformers.  They  are  oppressed  by  the  bru 
talities  and  industrial  injustices  which  we  see  everywhere 
about  us.  When  I  recall  how  often  I  have  seen  Socialists 
and  ardent  non-Socialists  working  side  by  side  for  some 
specific  measure  of  social  or  industrial  reform,  and  how  I 
have  found  opposed  to  them  on  the  side  of  privilege  many 
shrill  reactionaries  who  insist  on  calling  all  reformers 
Socialists,  I  refuse  to  be  panic-stricken  by  having  this  title 
mistakenly  applied  to  me. 

None  the  less,  without  impugning  their  motives,  I  do 
disagree  most  emphatically  with  both  the  fundamental 
philosophy  and  the  proposed  remedies  of  the  Marxian  So 
cialists.  These  Socialists  are  unalterably  opposed  to  our 
whole  industrial  system.  They  believe  that  the  payment 
of  wages  means  everywhere  and  inevitably  an  exploitation 
of  the  laborer  by  the  employer,  and  that  this  leads  in 
evitably  to  a  class  war  between  those  two  groups,  or,  as 
they  would  say,  between  the  capitalists  and  the  proletariat. 
They  assert  that  this  class  war  is  already  upon  us  and  can 
only  be  ended  when  capitalism  is  entirely  destroyed  and 
all  the  machines,  mills,  mines,  railroads  and  other  private 
property  used  in  production  are  confiscated,  expropriated 
or  taken  over  by  the  workers.  They  do  not  as  a  rule  claim 
— although  some  of  the  sinister  extremists  among  them  do 
— that  this  class  war  is  a  war  of  blood  and  bullets,  but  they 
do  claim  that  there  is  and  must  be  a  continual  struggle 
between  two  great  classes,  whose  interests  are  opposed  and 
cannot  be  reconciled.  In  this  war  they  insist  that  the  whole 
government — National,  State  and  local — is  on  the  side  of 
the  employers  and  is  used  by  them  against  the  workmen, 
and  that  our  law  and  even  our  common  morality  are  class 
weapons,  like  a  policeman's  club  or  a  Gatling  gun. 

I  have  never  believed,  and  do  not  to-day  believe,  that 


484    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

such  a  class  war  is  upon  us,  or  need  ever  be  upon  us ;  nor 
do  I  believe  that  the  interests  of  wage-earners  and  em 
ployers  cannot  be  harmonized,  compromised  and  adjusted. 
It  would  be  idle  to  deny  that  wage-earners  have  certain 
different  economic  interests  from,  let  us  say,  manufac 
turers  or  importers,  just  as  farmers  have  different  inter 
ests  from  sailors,  and  fishermen  from  bankers.  There  is 
no  reason  why  any  of  these  economic  groups  should  not 
consult  their  group  interests  by  any  legitimate  means  and 
with  due  regard  to  the  common,  overlying  interests  of  alL 
I  do  not  even  deny  that  the  majority  of  wage-earners,  be 
cause  they  have  less  property  and  less  industrial  security 
than  others  and  because  they  do  not  own  the  machinery 
with  which  they  work  (as  does  the  farmer)  are  perhaps  in 
greater  need  of  acting  together  than  are  other  groups  in 
the  community.  But  I  do  insist  (and  I  believe  that  the 
great  majority  of  wage-earners  take  the  same  view)  that 
employers  and  employees  have  overwhelming  interests  in 
common,  both  as  partners  in  industry  and  as  citizens  of  the 
Kepublic,  and  that  where  these  interests  are  apart  they 
can  be  adjusted  by  so  altering  our  laws  and  their  interpre 
tation  as  to  secure  to  all  members  of  the  community  social 
and  industrial  justice. 

I  have  always  maintained  that  our  worst  revolutionaries 
to-day  are  those  reactionaries  who  do  not  see  and  will  not 
admit  that  there  is  any  need  for  change.  Such  men  seem 
to  believe  that  the  four  and  a  half  million  Progressive 
voters,  who  in  1912  registered  their  solemn  protest  against 
our  social  and  industrial  injustices,  are  "anarchists,"  who 
are  not  willing  to  let  ill  enough  alone.  If  these  reaction 
aries  had  lived  at  an  earlier  time  in  our  history,  they  would 
have  advocated  Sedition  Laws,  opposed  free  speech  and 
free  assembly,  and  voted  against  free  schools,  free  access 
by  settlers  to  the  public  lands,  mechanics'  lien  laws,  the 
prohibition  of  truck  stores  and  the  abolition  of  imprison 
ment  for  debt;  and  they  are  the  men  who  to-day  oppose 
minimum  wage  laws,  insurance  of  workmen  against  the  ills 
of  industrial  life  and  the  reform  of  our  legislators  and  our 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  485 

courts,  which  can  alone  render  such  measures  possible. 
Some  of  these  reactionaries  are  not  bad  men,  but  merely 
shortsighted  and  belated.  It  is  these  reactionaries,  how 
ever,  who,  by  "standing  pat"  on  industrial  injustice,  incite 
inevitably  to  industrial  revolt,  and  it  is  only  we  who  advo 
cate  political  and  industrial  democracy  who  render  possible 
the  progress  of  our  American  industry  on  large  construc 
tive  lines  with  a  minimum  of  friction  because  with  a  maxi 
mum  of  justice. 

Everything  possible  should  be  done  to  secure  the  wage- 
workers  fair  treatment.  There  should  be  an  increased 
wage  for  the  worker  of  increased  productiveness.  Every 
thing  possible  should  be  done  against  the  capitalist  who 
strives,  not  to  reward  special  efficiency,  but  to  use  it  as  an 
excuse  for  reducing  the  reward  of  moderate  efficiency.  The 
capitalist  is  an  unworthy  citizen  who  pays  the  efficient  man 
no  more  than  he  has  been  content  to  pay  the  average  man, 
and  nevertheless  reduces  the  wage  of  the  average  man; 
and  effort  should  be  made  by  the  Government  to  check  and 
punish  him.  When  labor-saving  machinery  is  introduced, 
special  care  should  be  taken — by  the  Government  if  neces 
sary — to  see  that  the  wage-worker  gets  his  share  of  the 
benefit,  and  that  it  is  not  all  absorbed  by  the  employer  or 
capitalist.  The  following  case,  which  has  come  to  my 
knowledge,  illustrates  what  I  mean.  A  number  of  new 
machines  were  installed  in  a  certain  shoe  factory,  and  as 
a  result  there  was  a  heavy  increase  in  production  even 
though  there  was  no  increase  in  the  labor  force.  Some  of 
the  workmen  were  instructed  in  the  use  of  these  machines 
by  special  demonstrators  sent  out  by  the  makers  of  the 
machines.  These  men,  by  reason  of  their  special  aptitudes 
and  the  fact  that  they  were  not  called  upon  to  operate  the 
machines  continuously  nine  hours  every  day,  week  in  and 
week  out,  but  only  for  an  hour  or  so  at  special  times,  wrere 
naturally  able  to  run  the  machines  at  their  maximum  ca 
pacity.  When  these  demonstrators  had  left  the  factory, 
and  the  company's  own  employees  had  become  used  to 
operating  the  machines  at  a  fair  rate  of  speed,  the  foreman 


486    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

of  the  establishment  gradually  speeded  the  machines  and 
demanded  a  larger  and  still  larger  output,  constantly  en 
deavoring  to  drive  the  men  on  to  greater  exertions.  Even 
with  a  slightly  less  maximum  capacity,  the  introduction 
of  this  machinery  resulted  in  a  great  increase  over  former 
production  with  the  same  amount  of  labor;  and  so  great 
were  the  profits  from  the  business  in  the  following  two 
years  as  to  equal  the  total  capitalized  stock  of  the  company. 
But  not  a  cent  got  into  the  pay  envelope  of  the  workmen 
beyond  what  they  had  formerly  been  receiving  before  the 
introduction  of  this  new  machinery,  notwithstanding  that 
it  had  meant  an  added  strain,  physical  and  mental,  upon 
their  energies,  and  that  they  were  forced  to  work  harder 
than  ever  before.  The  whole  of  the  increased  profits  re 
mained  with  the  company.  Now  this  represented  an  "  in 
crease  of  efficiency/'  with  a  positive  decrease  of  social  and 
industrial  justice.  The  increase  of  prosperity  which  came 
from  increase  of  production  in  no  way  benefited  the  wage- 
workers.  I  hold  that  they  were  treated  with  gross  injustice ; 
and  that  society,  acting  if  necessary  through  the  Govern 
ment,  in  such  a  case  should  bend  its  energies  to  remedy 
such  injustice;  and  I  will  support  any  proper  legislation 
that  will  aid  in  securing  the  desired  end. 

The  wage-worker  should  not  only  receive  fair  treatment ; 
he  should  give  fair  treatment.  In  order  that  prosperity 
may  be  passed  around  it  is  necessary  that  the  prosperity 
exist.  In  order  that  labor  shall  receive  its  fair  share  in  the 
division  of  reward  it  is  necessary  that  there  be  a  reward 
to  divide.  Any  proposal  to  reduce  efficiency  by  insisting 
that  the  most  efficient  shall  be  limited  in  their  output  to 
what  the  least  efficient  can  do,  is  a  proposal  to  limit  by  so 
much  production,  and  therefore  to  impoverish  by  so  much 
«the  public,  and  specifically  to  reduce  the  amount  that  can 
be  divided  among  the  producers.  This  is  all  wrong.  Our 
protest  must  be  against  unfair  division  of  the  reward  for 
production.  Every  encouragement  should  be  given  the 
business  man,  the  employer,  to  make  his  business  pros 
perous,  and  therefore  to  earn  more  money  for  himself; 


SOCIAL   AND   INDUSTRIAL,   JUSTICE  48? 

and  in  like  fashion  every  encouragement  should  be  given 
the  efficient  workman.  We  must  always  keep  in  mind  that 
to  reduce  the  amount  of  production  serves  merely  to  reduce 
the  amount  that  is  to  be  divided,  is  in  no  way  permanently 
efficient  as  a  protest  against  unequal  distribution  and  is 
permanently  detrimental  to  the  entire  community.  But 
increased  productiveness  is  not  secured  by  excessive  labor 
amid  unhealthy  surroundings.  The  contrary  is  true. 
Shorter  hours,  and  healthful  conditions,  and  opportunity 
for  the  wage-worker  to  make  more  money,  and  the  chance 
for  enjoyment  as  well  as  work,  all  add  to  efficiency.  My 
contention  is  that  there  should  be  no  penalization  of  effi 
cient  productiveness,  brought  about  under  healthy  condi 
tions  ;  but  that  every  increase  of  production  brought  about 
by  an  increase  in  efficiency  should  benefit  all  the  parties  to 
it,  including  wage-workers  as  well  as  employers  or  capital 
ists,  men  who  work  with  their  hands  as  well  as  men  who 
work  with  their  heads. 

With  the  Western  [Federation  of  Miners  I  more  than 
once  had  serious  trouble.  The  leaders  of  this  organization 
had  preached  anarchy,  and  certain  of  them  were  indicted 
for  having  practiced  murder  in  the  case  of  Governor 
Steunenberg,  of  Idaho.  On  one  occasion  in  a  letter  or 
speech  I  coupled  condemnation  of  these  labor  leaders  and 
condemnation  of  certain  big  capitalists,  describing  them 
all  alike  as  " undesirable  citizens. "  This  gave  great  offense 
to  both  sides.  The  open  attack  upon  me  was  made  for  the 
most  part  either  by  the  New  York  newspapers  which  were 
frankly  representatives  of  Wall  Street,  or  else  by  those  so- 
called — and  miscalled — Socialists  who  had  anarchistic  lean 
ings.  Many  of  the  latter  sent  me  open  letters  of  denun 
ciation,  and  to  one  of  them  I  responded  as  follows : 

THE  WHITE  HOUSE,  WASHINGTON, 

April  22,  1907. 
Dear  Sir: 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  19th  instant,  in  which 
you  enclose  the  draft  of  the  formal  letter  which  is  to  follow. 


488    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

I  have  been  notified  that  several  delegations,  bearing  simi 
lar  requests,  are  on  the  way  hither.  In  the  letter  you,  on 
behalf  of  the  Cook  County,  Moyer-Haywood  conference, 
protest  against  certain  language  I  used  in  a  recent  letter 
which  you  assert  to  be  designed  to  influence  the  course  of 
justice  in  the  case  of  the  trial  for  murder  of  Messrs.  Mover 
and  Haywood.  I  entirely  agree  with  you  that  it  is  im 
proper  to  endeavor  to  influence  the  course  of  justice, 
whether  by  threats  or  in  any  similar  manner.  For  this 
reason  I  have  regretted  most  deeply  the  actions  of  such 
organizations  as  your  own  in  undertaking  to  accomplish 
this  very  result  in  the  very  case  of  which  you  speak.  For 
instance,  your  letter  is  headed  "Cook  County  Moyer-Hay- 
wood-Pettibone  Conference,"  with  the  headlines:  "Death 
— cannot — will  not — and  shall  not  claim  our  brothers!" 
This  shows  that  you  and  your  associates  are  not  demanding 
a  fair  trial,  or  working  for  a  fair  trial,  but  are  announcing 
in  advance  that  the  verdict  shall  only  be  one  way  and  that 
you  will  not  tolerate  any  other  verdict.  Such  action  is 
flagrant  in  its  impropriety,  and  I  join  heartily  in  con 
demning  it. 

But  it  is  a  simple  absurdity  to  suppose  that  because 
any  man  is  on  trial  for  a  given  offense  he  is  therefore  to 
be  freed  from  all  criticism  upon  his  general  conduct  and 
manner  of  life.  In  my  letter  to  which  you  object  I  referred 
to  a  certain  prominent  financier,  Mr.  Harriman,  on  the 
one  hand,  and  to  Messrs.  Moyer,  Haywood  and  Debs  on 
the  other,  as  being  equally  undesirable  citizens.  It  is  as 
foolish  to  assert  that  this  was  designed  to  influence  the  trial 
of  Moyer  and  Haywood  as  to  assert  that  it  was  designed  to 
influence  the  suits  that  have  been  brought  against  Mr. 
Harriman.  I  neither  expressed  nor  indicated  any  opinion 
as  to  whether  Messrs.  Moyer  and  Haywood  were  guilty 
of  the  murder  of  Governor  Steunenberg.  If  they  are  guilty, 
they  certainly  ought  to  be  punished.  If  they  are  not  guilty, 
they  certainly  ought  not  to  be  punished.  But  no  possible 
outcome  either  of  the  trial  or  the  suits  can  affect  my  judg 
ment  as  to  the  undesirability  of  the  type  of  citizenship  of 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  489 

those  whom  I  mentioned.  Messrs.  Moyer,  Haywood,  and 
Debs  stand  as  representatives  of  those  men  who  have  done 
as  much  to  discredit  the  labor  movement  as  the  worst  specu 
lative  financiers  or  most  unscrupulous  employers  of  labor 
and  debauchers  of  legislatures  have  done  to  discredit  honest 
capitalists  and  fair-dealing  business  men.  They  stand  as 
the  representatives  of  those  men  who  by  their  public  utter 
ances  and  manifestoes,  by  the  utterances  of  the  papers  they 
control  or  inspire,  and  by  the  words  and  deeds  of  those 
associated  with  or  subordinated  to  them,  habitually  appear 
as  guilty  of  incitement  to  or  apology  for  bloodshed  and 
violence.  If  this  does  not  constitute  undesirable  citizenship, 
then  there  can  never  be  any  undesirable  citizens.  The  men 
whom  I  denounce  represent  the  men  who  have  abandoned 
that  legitimate  movement  for  the  uplifting  of  labor,  with 
which  I  have  the  most  hearty  sympathy ;  they  have  adopted 
practices  which  cut  them  off  from  those  who  lead  this  legiti 
mate  movement.  In  every  way  I  shall  support  the  law- 
abiding  and  upright  representatives  of  labor;  and  in  no 
way  can  I  better  support  them  than  by  drawing  the  sharpest 
possible  line  between  them  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  those  preachers  of  violence  who  are  themselves 
the  worst  foes  of  the  honest  laboring  man. 

Let  me  repeat  my  deep  regret  that  any  body  of  men 
should  so  far  forget  their  duty  to  the  country  as  to  endeavor 
by  the  formation  of  societies  and  in  other  ways  to  influence 
the  course  of  justice  in  this  matter.  I  have  received  many 
such  letters  as  yours.  Accompanying  them  were  news 
paper  clippings  announcing  demonstrations,  parades,  and 
mass-meetings  designed  to  show  that  the  representatives 
of  labor,  without  regard  to  the  facts,  demand  the  acquittal 
of  Messrs.  Haywood  and  Moyer.  Such  meetings  can,  of 
course,  be  designed  only  to  coerce  court  or  jury  in  rendering 
a  verdict,  and  they  therefore  deserve  all  the  condemna 
tion  which  you  in  your  letters  say  should  be  awarded  to 
those  who  endeavor  improperly  to  influence  the  course  of 
justice. 

You  would,  of  course,  be  entirely  within  your  rights 


490    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

if  you  merely  announced  that  you  thought  Messrs.  Moyer 
and  Haywood  were  "desirable  citizens" — though  in  such 
case  I  should  take  frank  issue  with  you  and  should  say  that, 
wholly  without  regard  to  whether  or  not  they  are  guilty  of 
the  crime  for  which  they  are  now  being  tried,  they  represent 
as  thoroughly  undesirable  a  type  of  citizenship  as  can  be 
found  in  this  country;  a  type  which,  in  the  letter  to  which 
you  so  unreasonably  take  exception,  I  showed  not  to  be 
confined  to  any  one  class,  but  to  exist  among  some  repre 
sentatives  of  great  capitalists  as  well  as  among  some  rep 
resentatives  of  wage-workers.  In  that  letter  I  condemned 
both  types.  Certain  representatives  of  the  great  capitalists 
in  turn  condemned  me  for  including  Mr.  Harriman  in  my 
condemnation  of  Messrs.  Moyer  and  Haywood.  Certain  of 
the  representatives  of  labor  in  their  turn  condemned  me 
because  I  included  Messrs.  Moyer  and  Haywood  as  un 
desirable  citizens  together  with  Mr.  Harriman.  I  am  as 
profoundly  indifferent  to  the  condemnation  in  one  case 
as  in  the  other.  I  challenge  as  a  right  the  support  of  all 
good  Americans,  whether  wage-workers  or  capitalists, 
whatever  their  occupation  or  creed,  or  in  whatever  portion 
of  the  country  they  live,  when  I  condemn  both  the  types 
of  bad  citizenship  which  I  have  held  up  to  reprobation.  It 
seems  to  be  a  mark  of  utter  insincerity  to  fail  thus  to  con 
demn  both ;  and  to  apologize  for  either  robs  the  man  thus 
apologizing  of  all  right  to  condemn  any  wrongdoing  in  any 
man,  rich  or  poor,  in  public  or  in  private  life. 

You  say  you  ask  for  a  "square  deal"  for  Messrs.  Moyer 
and  Haywood.  So  do  I.  When  I  say  "square  deal,"  I 
mean  a  square  deal  to  every  one;  it  is  equally  a  violation 
of  the  policy  of  the  square  deal  for  a  capitalist  to  pro 
test  against  denunciation  of  a  capitalist  who  is  guilty  of 
wrongdoing  and  for  a  labor  leader  to  protest  against  the 
denunciation  of  a  labor  leader  who  has  been  guilty  of 
wrongdoing.  I  stand  for  equal  justice  to  both;  and  so  far 
as  in  my  power  lies  I  shall  uphold  justice,  whether  the 
man  accused  of  guilt  has  behind  him  the  wealthiest  corpora 
tions,,  the  greatest  aggregations  of  riches  in  the  country, 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  491 

or  whether  he  has  behind  him  the  most  influential  labor 
organizations  in  the  country. 

I  treated  anarchists  and  the  bomb-throwing  and  dyna 
miting  gentry  precisely  as  I  treated  other  criminals.  Mur 
der  is  murder.  It  is  not  rendered  one  whit  better  by  the 
allegation  that  it  is  committed  on  behalf  of  "a  cause."  It 
is  true  that  law  and  order  are  not  all-sufficient;  but  they 
are  essential ;  lawlessness  and  murderous  violence  must  be 
quelled  before  any  permanence  of  reform  can  be  obtained. 
Yet  when  they  have  been  quelled,  the  beneficiaries  of  the 
enforcement  of  law  must  in  their  turn  be  taught  that  law 
is  upheld  as  a  means  to  the  enforcement  of  justice,  and  that 
we  will  not  tolerate  its  being  turned  into  an  engine  of  in 
justice  and  oppression.  The  fundamental  need  in  dealing 
with  our  people,  whether  laboring  men  or  others,  is  not 
charity  but  justice ;  we  must  all  work  in  common  for  the 
common  end  of  helping  each  and  all,  in  a  spirit  of  the 
sanest,  broadest  and  deepest  brotherhood. 

It  was  not  always  easy  to  avoid  feeling  very  deep  anger 
with  the  selfishness  and  short-sightedness  shown  both  by 
the  representatives  of  certain  employers 9  organizations  and 
by  certain  great  labor  federations  or  unions.  One  such 
employers'  association  was  called  the  National  Association 
of  Manufacturers.  Extreme  though  the  attacks  sometimes 
made  upon  me  by  the  extreme  labor  organizations  were, 
they  were  not  quite  as  extreme  as  the  attacks  made  upon 
me  by  the  head  of  the  National  Association  of  Manufactur 
ers,  and  as  regards  their  attitude  toward  legislation  I  came 
to  the  conclusion  toward  the  end  of  my  term  that  the  latter 
had  actually  gone  further  the  wrong  way  than  did  the 
former — and  the  former  went  a  good  distance  also.  The 
opposition  of  the  National  Association  of  Manufacturers 
to  every  rational  and  moderate  measure  for  benefiting 
workingmen,  such  as  measures  abolishing  child  labor,  or 
securing  workmen's  compensation,  caused  me  real  and 
grave  concern;  for  I  felt  that  it  was  ominous  of  evil  for 
the  whole  country  to  have  nien  wiio  ought  to  stand  high  in 


492    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

wisdom  and  in  guiding  force  take  a  course  and  use  language 
of  such  reactionary  type  as  directly  to  incite  revolution — 
for  this  is  what  the  extreme  reactionary  always  does. 

Often  I  was  attacked  by  the  two  sides  at  once.  In  the 
spring  of  1906  I  received  in  the  same  mail  a  letter  from  a 
very  good  friend  of  mine  who  thought  that  I  had  been  un 
duly  hard  on  some  labor  men,  and  a  letter  from  another 
friend,  the  head  of  a  great  corporation,  who  complained 
about  me  for  both  favoring  labor  and  speaking  against 
large  fortunes.  My  answers  ran  as  follows: 

April  26,  1906. 

' i  Personal. 
My  dear  Doctor: 

In  one  of  my  last  letters  to  you  I  enclosed  you  a  copy  of  a 
letter  of  mine,  in  which  I  quoted  from  [So  and  so's]  ad 
vocacy  of  murder.  You  may  be  interested  to  know  that  he 
and  his  brother  Socialists — in  reality  anarchists — of  the 
frankly  murderous  type  have  been  violently  attacking  my 
speech  because  of  my  allusion  to  the  sympathy  expressed 
for  murder.  In  The  Socialist,  of  Toledo,  Ohio,  of  April 
21st,  for  instance,  the  attack  [on  me]  is  based  specifically 
on  the  following  paragraph  of  my  speech,  to  which  he  takes 
violent  exception: 

We  can  no  more  and  no  less  afford  to  condone  evil  in 
the  man  of  capital  than  evil  in  the  man  of  no  capital.  The 
wealthy  man  who  exults  because  there  is  a  failure  of  justice 
in  the  effort  to  bring  some  trust  magnate  to  an  account 
for  his  misdeeds  is  as  bad  as,  and  no  worse  than,  the  so- 
called  labor  leader  who  clamorously  strives  to  excite  a  foul 
class  feeling  on  behalf  of  some  other  labor  leader  who  is 
implicated  in  murder.  One  attitude  is  as  bad  as  the  other, 
and  no  worse ;  in  each  case  the  accused  is  entitled  to  exact 
justice ;  and  in  neither  case  is  there  need  of  action  by  others 
which  can  be  construed  into  an  expression  of  sympathy  for 
crime. 

Remember  that  this  crowd  of  labor  leaders  have  done  all 
in  their  power  to  overawe  the  executive  and  the  courts  of 


SOCIAL    AND    INDUSTRIAL    JUSTICE  493 

Idaho  on  behalf  of  men  accused  of  murder,  and  beyond 
question  inciters  of  murder  in  the  past." 

April  26,  1906. 
"My  dear  Judge: 

I  wish  the  papers  had  given  more  prominence  to  what 
I  said  as  to  the  murder  part  of  my  speech.  But  oh,  my 
dear  sir,  I  utterly  and  radically  disagree  with  you  in  what 
you  say  about  large  fortunes.  I  wish  it  were  in  my  power 
to  devise  some  scheme  to  make  it  increasingly  difficult  to 
heap  them  up  beyond  a  certain  amount.  As  the  difficulties 
in  the  way  of  such  a  scheme  are  very  great,  let  us  at  least 
prevent  their  being  bequeathed  after  death  or  given  during 
life  to  any  one  man  in  excessive  amount. 

You  and  other  capitalist  friends,  on  one  side,  shy  off  at 
what  I  say  against  them.  Have  you  seen  the  frantic  articles 
against  me  by  [the  anarchists  and]  the  Socialists  of  the 
bomb-throwing  persuasion,  on  the  other  side,  because  of 
what  I  said  in  my  speech  in  reference  to  whose  who,  in 
effect,  advocate  murder?" 

On  another  occasion  I  was  vehemently  denounced  in  cer 
tain  capitalistic  papers  because  I  had  a  number  of  labor 
leaders,  including  miners  from  Butte,  lunch  with  me  at 
the  White  House;  and  this  at  the  very  time  that  the 
Western  Federation  of  Miners  was  most  ferocious  in  its 
denunciation  of  me  because  of  what  it  alleged  to  be  my  un 
friendly  attitude  toward  labor.  To  one  of  my  critics  I  set 
forth  my  views  in  the  following  letter : 

November  26,  1903. 

"I  have  your  letter  of  the  25th  instant,  with  enclosure. 
These  men,  not  all  of  whom  were  miners,  by  the  way,  came 
here  and  were  at  lunch  with  me,  in  company  with  Mr. 
Carroll  D.  Wright,  Mr.  Wayne  MacVeagh,  and  Secretary 
Cortelyou.  They  are  as  decent  a  set  of  men  as  can  be. 
They  all  agreed  entirely  with  me  in  my  denunciation  of 
what  had  been  done  in  the  Coeur  d'Alene  country;  and  it 
appeared  that  some  of  them  were  on  the  platform  with 


494    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

me  when  I  denounced  this  type  of  outrage  three  years  ago 
in  Butte.  There  is  not  one  man  who  was  here,  who,  I  be 
lieve,  was  in  any  way,  shape  or  form  responsible  for  such 
outrages.  I  find  that  the  ultra-Socialistic  members  of  the 
unions  in  Butte  denounced  these  men  for  coming  here,  in 
a  manner  as  violent — and  I  may  say  as  irrational — as  the 
denunciation  [by  the  capitalistic  writer]  in  the  article  you 
sent  me.  Doubtless  the  gentleman  of  whom  you  speak 
as  your  general  manager  is  an  admirable  man.  I,  of  course, 
was  not  alluding  to  him ;  but  I  most  emphatically  was  allud 
ing  to  men  who  write  such  articles  as  that  you  sent  me. 
These  articles  are  to  be  paralleled  by  the  similar  articles  in 
the  Populist  and  Socialist  papers  when  two  years  ago  I 
had  at  dinner  at  one  time  Pierpont  Morgan,  and  at  another 
time  J.  J.  Hill,  and  at  another,  Harriman,  and  at  another 
time  Schiff.  Furthermore,  they  could  be  paralleled  by  the 
articles  in  the  same  type  of  paper  which  at  the  time  of  the 
Miller  incident  in  the  Printing  Office  were  in  a  condition  of 
nervous  anxiety  because  I  met  the  labor  leaders  to  discuss 
it.  It  would  have  been  a  great  misfortune  if  I  had  not  met 
them;  and  it  would  have  been  an  even  greater  misfortune 
if  after  meeting  them  I  had  yielded  to  their  protests  in 
the  matter. 

You  say  in  your  letter  that  you  know  that  I  am  'on 
record'  as  opposed  to  violence.  Pardon  my  saying  that 
this  seems  to  me  not  the  right  way  to  put  the  matter,  if 
by  ' record'  you  mean  utterance  and  not  action.  Aside 
from  what  happened  when  I  was  Governor  in  connection, 
for  instance  with  the  Croton  dam  strike  riots,  all  you  have 
to  do  is  to  turn  back  to  what  took  place  last  June  in  Arizona 
— and  you  can  find  out  about  it  from  [Mr.  X]  of  New  York. 
The  miners  struck,  violence  followed,  and  the  Arizona 
Territorial  authorities  notified  me  they  could  not  grapple 
with  the  situation.  Within  twenty  minutes  of  the  receipt 
of  the  telegram,  orders  were  issued  to  the  nearest  available 
troops,  and  twenty-four  hours  afterwards  General  Baldwin 
and  his  regulars  were  on  the  ground,  and  twenty-four  hours 
later  every  vestige  of  disorder  had  disappeared.  The 


SOCIAL   AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  495 

Miners'  Federation  in  their  meeting,  I  think  at  Denver, 
a  short  while  afterwards,  passed  resolutions  denouncing 
me.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  Mining  and  Engineering 
Journal  paid  any  heed  to  this  incident  or  knew  of  it.  If 
the  Journal  did,  I  suppose  it  can  hardly  have  failed  to 
understand  that  to  put  an  immediate  stop  to  rioting  by  the 
use  of  the  United  States  army  is  a  fact  of  importance  be 
side  which  the  criticism  of  my  having  ' labor  leaders'  to 
lunch,  shrinks  into  the  same  insignificance  as  the  criticism 
in  a  different  type  of  paper  about  my  having  *  trust  mag 
nates'  to  lunch.  While  I  am  President  I  wish  the  labor 
man  to  feel  that  he  has  the  same  right  of  access  to  me  that 
the  capitalist  has;  that  the  doors  swing  open  as  easily  to 
the  wage-wTorker  as  to  the  head  of  a  big  corporation — and 
no  easier.  Anything  else  seems  to  be  not  only  un-American, 
but  as  symptomatic  of  an  attitude  which  will  cost  grave 
trouble  if  persevered  in.  To  discriminate  against  labor 
men  from  Butte  because  there  is  reason  to  believe  that 
rioting  has  been  excited  in  other  districts  by  certain  labor 
unions,  or  individuals  in  labor  unions  in  Butte,  would  be  to 
adopt  precisely  the  attitude  of  those  who  desire  me  to  dis 
criminate  against  all  capitalists  in  "Wall  Street  because 
there  are  plenty  of  capitalists  in  "Wall  Street  who  have  been 
guilty  of  bad  financial  practices  and  who  have  endeavored 
to  override  or  evade  the  laws  of  the  land.  In  my  judgment, 
the  only  safe  attitude  for  a  private  citizen,  and  still  more 
for  a  public  servant,  to  assume,  is  that  he  will  draw  the  line 
on  conduct,  discriminating  against  neither  corporation  nor 
union  as  such,  nor  in  favor  of  either  as  such,  but  endeavor 
ing  to  make  the  decent  member  of  the  union  and  the  upright 
capitalists  alike  feel  that  they  are  bound,  not  only  by  self- 
interest,  but  by  every  consideration  of  principle  and  duty 
to  stand  together  on  the  matters  of  most  moment  to  the 
nation." 

On  another  of  the  various  occasions  when  I  had  labor 
leaders  to  dine  at  the  White  House,  my  critics  were  rather 
shocked  because  I  had  John  Morley  to  meet  them.  The 


496    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

labor  leaders  in  question  included  the  heads  of  the  various 
railroad  brotherhoods,  men  like  Mr.  Morrissey,  in  whose 
sound  judgment  and  high  standard  of  citizenship  I  had 
peculiar  confidence ;  and  I  asked  Mr.  Morley  to  meet  them 
because  they  represented  the  exact  type  of  American  citi 
zen  with  whom  I  thought  he  ought  to  be  brought  in  contact. 
One  of  the  devices  sometimes  used  by  big  corporations  to 
break  down  the  law  was  to  treat  the  passage  of  laws  as  an 
excuse  for  action  on  their  part  which  they  knew  would  be 
resented  by  the  public,  it  being  their  purpose  to  turn  this 
resentment  against  the  law  instead  of  against  themselves. 
The  heads  of  the  Louisville  and  Nashville  road  were  bitter 
opponents  of  everything  done  by  the  Government  toward 
securing  good  treatment  for  their  employees.  In  February, 
1908,  they  and  various  other  railways  announced  that  they 
intended  to  reduce  the  wages  of  their  employees.  A  general 
strike,  with  all  the  attendant  disorder  and  trouble,  was 
threatened  in  consequence.  I  accordingly  sent  the  follow 
ing  open  letter  to  the  Inter-State  Commerce  Commission: 

February  18,  1908. 

"To  the  Inter -State  Commerce  Commission: 

I  am  informed  that  a  number  of  railroad  companies  have 
served  notice  of  a  proposed  reduction  of  wages  of  their 
employees.  One  of  them,  the  Louisville  and  Nashville, 
in  announcing  the  reduction,  states  that  'the  drastic  laws 
inimical  to  the  interests  of  the  railroads  that  have  in  the 
past  year  or  two  been  enacted  by  Congress  and  the  State 
Legislatures'  are  largely  or  chiefly  responsible  for  the 
conditions  requiring  the  reduction. 

Under  such  circumstances  it  is  possible  that  the  public 
may  soon  be  confronted  by  serious  industrial  disputes,  and 
the  law  provides  that  in  such  case  either  party  may  demand 
the  services  of  your  Chairman  and  of  the  Commissioner  of 
Labor  as  a  Board  of  Mediation  and  Conciliation.  These 
reductions  in  wages  may  be  warranted,  or  they  may  not. 
As  to  this  the  public,  which  is  a  vitally  interested  party,  cap 


SOCIAL    AND    INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  497 

form  no  judgment  without  a  more  complete  knowledge 
of  the  essential  facts  and  real  merits  of  the  case  than  it  now 
has  or  than  it  can  possibly  obtain  from  the  special  plead 
ings,  certain  to  be  put  forth  by  each  side  in  case  their  dis 
pute  should  bring  about  serious  interruption  to  traffic.  If 
the  reduction  in  wages  is  due  to  natural  causes,  the  loss  of 
business  being  such  that  the  burden  should  be  and  is, 
equitably  distributed  between  capitalist  and  wage-worker, 
the  public  should  know  it.  If  it  is  caused  by  legislation, 
the  public,  and  Congress,  should  know  it ;  and  if  it  is  caused 
by  misconduct  in  the  past  financial  or  other  operations  of 
any  railroad,  then  everybody  should  know  it,  especially  if 
the  excuse  of  unfriendly  legislation  is  advanced  as  a  method 
of  covering  up  past  business  misconduct  by  the  railroad 
managers,  or  as  a  justification  for  failure  to  treat  fairly 
the  wage-earning  employees  of  the  company. 

Moreover,  an  industrial  conflict  between  a  railroad  cor 
poration  and  its  employees  offers  peculiar  opportunities 
to  any  small  number  of  evil-disposed  persons  to  destroy 
life  and  property  and  foment  public  disorder.  Of  course,  if 
life,  property,  and  public  order  are  endangered,  prompt 
and  drastic  measures  for  their  protection  become  the  first 
plain  duty.  All  other  issues  then  become  subordinate  to 
the  preservation  of  the  public  peace,  and  the  real  merits 
of  the  original  controversy  are  necessarily  lost  from  view. 
This  vital  consideration  should  be  ever  kept  in  mind  by 
all  law-abiding  and  far-sighted  members  of  labor  organi 
zations. 

It  is  sincerely  to  be  hoped,  therefore,  that  any  wage  con 
troversy  that  may  arise  between  the  railroads  and  their 
employees  may  find  a  peaceful  solution  through  the  methods 
of  conciliation  and  arbitration  already  provided  by  Con 
gress,  which  have  proven  so  effective  during  the  past  year. 
To  this  end  the  Commission  should  be  in  a  position  to  have 
available  for  any  Board  of  Conciliation  or  Arbitration 
relevant  data  pertaining  to  such  carriers  as  may  become 
involved  in  industrial  disputes.  Should  conciliation  fail  to 
effect  a  settlement  and .  arbitration  be  rejected,  accurate 


498    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT- AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

information  should  be  available  in  order  to  develop  a  prop 
erly  informed  public  opinion. 

I  therefore  ask  you  to  make  such  investigation,  both  of 
your  records  and  by  any  other  means  at  your  command,  as 
will  enable  you  to  furnish  data  concerning  such  conditions 
obtaining  on  the  Louisville  and  Nashville  and  any  other 
roads,  as  may  relate,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  the  real 
merits  of  the  possibly  impending  controversy. 

THEODORE  EOOSEVELT." 

This  letter  achieved  its  purpose,  and  the  threatened  re 
duction  of  wages  was  not  made.  It  was  an  instance  of  what 
could  be  accomplished  by  governmental  action.  Let  me 
add,  however,  with  all  the  emphasis  I  possess,  that  this 
does  not  mean  any  failure  on  my  part  to  recognize  the  fact 
that  if  governmental  action  places  too  heavy  burdens  on 
railways,  it  will  be  impossible  for  them  to  operate  without 
doing  injustice  to  somebody.  Kailways  cannot  pay  proper 
wages  and  render  proper  service  unless  they  make  money. 
The  investors  must  get  a  reasonable  profit  or  they  will  not 
invest,  and  the  public  cannot  be  well  served  unless  the 
investors  are  making  reasonable  profits.  There  is  every 
reason  why  rates  should  not  be  too  high,  but  they  must  be 
sufficiently  high  to  allow  the  railways  to  pay  good  wages. 
Moreover,  when  laws  like  workmen's  compensation  laws, 
and  the  like  are  passed,  it  must  always  be  kept  in  mind  by 
the  Legislature  that  the  purpose  is  to  distribute  over  the 
whole  community  a  burden  that  should  not  be  borne  only  by 
those  least  able  to  bear  it — that  is,  by  the  injured  man  or 
the  widow  and  orphans  of  the  dead  man.  If  the  railway  is 
already  receiving  a  disproportionate  return  from  the  public, 
then  the  burden  may,  with  propriety,  bear  purely  on  the 
railway;  but  if  it  is  not  earning  a  disproportionate  return, 
then  the  public  must  bear  its  share  of  the  burden  of  the 
increased  service  the  railway  is  rendering.  Dividends  and 
wages  should  go  up  together;  and  the  relation  of  rates  to 
them  should  never  be  forgotten.  This  of  course  does  not 
apply  to  dividends  based  on  water ;  nor  does  it  mean  that  if 


SOCIAL   AND   INDUSTRIAL   JUSTICE  499 

foolish  people  have  built  a  road  that  renders  no  service,  the 
public  must  nevertheless  in  some  way  guarantee  a  return 
on  the  investment;  but  it  does  mean  that  the  interests  of 
the  honest  investor  are  entitled  to  the  same  protection  as 
the  interests  of  the  honest  manager,  the  honest  shipper  and 
the  honest  wage-earner.  All  these  conflicting  considerations 
should  be  carefully  considered  by  Legislatures  before  pass 
ing  laws.  One  of  the  great  objects  in  creating  commissions 
should  be  the  provision  of  disinterested,  fair-minded  ex 
perts  who  will  really  and  wisely  consider  all  these  matters, 
and  will  shape  their  actions  accordingly.  This  is  one  reason 
why  such  matters  as  the  regulation  of  rates,  the  provision 
for  full  crews  on  roads  and  the  like  should  be  left  for  treat 
ment  by  railway  commissions,  and  not  be  settled  off  hand 
by  direct  legislative  action. 


APPENDIX 

SOCIALISM 

As  regards  what  I  have  said  in  this  chapter  concerning  Socialism, 
I  wish  to  call  especial  attention  to  the  admirable  book  on  * '  Marxism 
versus  Socialism, "  which  has  just  been  published  by  Vladimir  D. 
Simkhovitch.  What  I  have,  here  and  elsewhere,  merely  pointed 
out  in  rough  and  ready  fashion  from  actual  observation  of  the  facts 
of  life  around  me,  Professor  Simkhovitch  in  his  book  has  discussed 
with  keen  practical  insight,  with  profundity  of  learning,  and  with 
a  wealth  of  applied  philosophy.  Crude  thinkers  in  the  United 
States,  and  moreover  honest  and  intelligent  men  who  are  not  crude 
thinkers,  but  who  are  oppressed  by  the  sight  of  the  misery  around 
them  and  have  not  deeply  studied  what  has  been  done  elsewhere, 
are  very  apt  to  adopt  as  their  own  the  theories  of  European 
Marxian  Socialists  of  half  a  century  ago,  ignorant  that  the  course 
of  events  has  so  completely  falsified  the  prophecies  contained  in 
these  theories  that  they  have  been  abandoned  even  by  the  authors 
themselves.  With  quiet  humor  Professor  Simkhovitch  now  and 
then  makes  an  allusion  which  shows  that  he  appreciates  to  per 
fection  this  rather  curious  quality  of  some  of  our  fellow  country 
men  ;  as  for  example  when  he  says  that  *  *  A  Socialist  State  with  the 
farmer  outside  of  it  is  a  conception  that  can  rest  comfortably  only 
in  the  head  of  an  American  Socialist,"  or  as  when  he  speaks  of 
Marx  and  Engels  as  men  i '  to  whom  thinking  was  not  an  irrelevant 
foreign  tradition."  Too  many  thoroughly  well-meaning  men  and 
women  in  the  America  of  to-day  glibly  repeat  and  accept — much 
as  medieval  schoolmen  repeated  and  accepted  authorized  dogma  in 
their  day — various  assumptions  and  speculations  by  Marx  and 
others  which  by  the  lapse  of  time  and  by  actual  experiment  have 
been  shown  to  possess  not  one  shred  of  value.  Professor  Sim 
khovitch  possesses  the  gift  of  condensation  as  well  as  the  gift  of 
clear  and  logical  statement,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  give  in  brief 
any  idea  of  his  admirable  work.  Every  social  reformer  who  desires 
to  face  facts  should  study  it — just  as  social  reformers  should 
study  John  Graham  Brooks 's  "American  Syndicalism."  From 
Professor  Simkhovitch 's  book  we  Americans  should  learn:  First, 
to  discard  crude  thinking;  second,  to  realize  that  the  orthodox 
or  so-called  scientific  or  purely  economic  or  materialistic  socialism 

600 


APPENDIX  501 

of  the  type  preached  by  Marx  is  an  exploded  theory;  and,  third, 
that  many  of  the  men  who  call  themselves  Socialists  to-day  are  in 
reality  merely  radical  social  reformers,  with  whom  on  many  points 
good  citizens  can  and  ought  to  work  in  hearty  general  agreement, 
and  whom  in  many  practical  matters  of  government  good  citizens 
can  well  afford  to  follow.- 


CHAPTER   XIV 

THE    MONROE    DOCTRINE    AND    THE    PANAMA    CANAL 

No  nation  can  claim  rights  without  acknowledging  the 
duties  that  go  with  the  rights.  It  is  a  contemptible  thing 
for  a  great  nation  to  render  itself  impotent  in  international 
action,  whether  because  of  cowardice  or  sloth,  or  sheer 
inability  or  unwillingness  to  look  into  the  future.  It  is  a 
very  wicked  thing  for  a  nation  to  do  wrong  to  others.  But 
the  most  contemptible  and  most  wicked  course  of  conduct 
is  for  a  nation  to  use  offensive  language  or  be  guilty  of 
offensive  actions  toward  other  people  and  yet  fail  to  hold 
its  own  if  the  other  nation  retaliates;  and  it  is  almost  as 
bad  to  undertake  responsibilities  and  then  not  fulfil  them. 
During  the  seven  and  a  half  years  that  I  was  President, 
this  Nation  behaved  in  international  matters  toward  all 
other  nations  precisely  as  an  honorable  man  behaves  to  his 
fellow-men.  We  made  no  promise  which  we  could  not  and 
did  not  keep.  We  made  no  threat  which  we  did  not  carry 
out.  We  never  failed  to  assert  our  rights  in  the  face  of 
the  strong,  and  we  never  failed  to  treat  both  strong  and 
weak  with  courtesy  and  justice ;  and  against  the  weak  when 
they  misbehaved  we  were  slower  to  assert  our  rights  than 
we  were  against  the  strong. 

As  a  legacy  of  the  Spanish  War  we  were  left  with 
peculiar  relations  to  the  Philippines,  Cuba,  and  Porto  Rico, 
and  with  an  immensely  added  interest  in  Central  America 
and  the  Caribbean  Sea.  As  regards  the  Philippines  my 
belief  was  that  we  should  train  them  for  self-government 
as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  then  leave  them  free  to  decide 
their  own  fate.  I  did  not  believe  in  setting  the  time-limit 
within  which  we  would  give  them  independence,  because  I 
did  not  believe  it  wise  to  try  to  forecast  how  soon  they 

502 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   503 

would  be  fit  for  self-government;  and  once  having  made 
the  promise  I  would  have  felt  that  it  was  imperative  to 
keep  it.  Within  a  few  months  of  my  assuming  office  we 
had  stamped  out  the  last  armed  resistance  in  the  Philip 
pines  that  was  not  of  merely  sporadic  character;  and  as 
soon  as  peace  was  secured  we  turned  our  energies  to  de 
veloping  the  islands  in  the  interests  of  the  natives.  We 
established  schools  everywhere;  we  built  roads;  we  ad 
ministered  an  even-handec1  justice ;  we  did  everything  pos 
sible  to  encourage  agriculture  and  industry;  and  in  con 
stantly  increasing  measure  we  employed  natives  to  do  their 
own  governing,  and  finally  provided  a  legislative  chamber. 
No  higher  grade  of  public  officials  ever  handled  the  affairs 
of  any  colony  than  the  public  officials  who  in  succession 
governed  the  Philippines.  With  the  possible  exception  of 
the  Sudan,  and  not  even  excepting  Algiers,  I  know  of  no 
country  ruled  and  administered  by  men  of  the  white  race 
where  that  rule  and  that  administration  have  been  exer 
cised  so  emphatically  with  an  eye  single  to  the  welfare  of 
the  natives  themselves.  The  English  and  Dutch  adminis 
trators  of  Malaysia  have  done  admirable  work;  but  the 
profit  to  the  Europeans  in  those  States  has  always  been 
one  of  the  chief  elements  considered ;  whereas  in  the  Philip 
pines  our  whole  attention  was  concentrated  upon  the  wel 
fare  of  the  Filipinos  themselves,  if  anything  to  the  neglect 
of  our  own  interests. 

I  do  not  believe  that  America  has  any  special  beneficial 
interest  in  retaining  the  Philippines.  Our  work  there  has 
benefited  us  only  as  any  efficiently  done  work  performed 
for  the  benefit  of  others  does  incidentally  help  the  character 
of  those  who  do  it.  The  people  of  the  islands  have  never 
developed  so  rapidly,  from  every  standpoint,  as  during  the 
years  of  the  American  occupation.  The  time  will  come 
when  it  will  be  wise  to  take  their  own  judgment  as  to 
whether  they  wish  to  continue  their  association  with  Amer 
ica  or  not.  There  is,  however,  one  consideration  upon 
which  we  should  insist.  Either  we  should  retain  complete 
control  of  the  islands,  or  absolve  ourselves  from  all  respon- 


504    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

sibility  for  them.  Any  half  and  half  course  would  be  both 
foolish  and  disastrous.  We  are  governing  and  have  been 
governing  the  islands  in  the  interests  of  the  Filipinos  them 
selves.  If  after  due  time  the  Filipinos  themselves  decide 
that  they  do  not  wish  to  be  thus  governed,  then  I  trust  that 
we  will  leave;  but  when  we  do  leave  it  must  be  distinctly 
understood  that  we  retain  no  protectorate — and  above  all 
that  we  take  part  in  no  joint  protectorate — over  the  islands, 
and  give  them  no  guarantee,  of  neutrality  or  otherwise; 
that,  in  short,  we  are  absolutely  quit  of  responsibility  for 
them,  of  every  kind  and  description. 

The  Filipinos  were  quite  incapable  of  standing  by  them 
selves  when  we  took  possession  of  the  islands,  and  we  had 
made  no  promise  concerning  them.  But  we  had  explicitly 
promised  to  leave  the  island  of  Cuba,  had  explicitly  prom 
ised  that  Cuba  should  be  independent.  Early  in  my  ad 
ministration  that  promise  was  redeemed.  When  the 
promise  wras  made,  I  doubt  if  there  was  a  single  ruler  or 
diplomat  in  Europe  who  believed  that  it  would  be  kept. 
As  far  as  I  know,  the  United  States  was  the  first  power 
which,  having  made  such  a  promise,  kept  it  in  letter  and 
spirit.  England  was  unwise  enough  to  make  such  a  prom 
ise  when  she  took  Egypt.  It  would  have  been  a  capital 
misfortune  to  have  kept  the  promise,  and  England  has 
remained  in  Egypt  for  over  thirty  years,  and  will  un 
questionably  remain  indefinitely ;  but  though  it  is  necessary 
for  her  to  do  so,  the  fact  of  her  doing  so  has  meant  the 
breaking  of  a  positive  promise  and  has  been  a  real  evil. 
Japan  made  the  same  guarantee  about  Korea,  but  as  far 
as  can  be  seen  there  was  never  even  any  thought  of  keeping 
the  promise  in  this  case;  and  Korea,  which  had  shown 
herself  utterly  impotent  either  for  self-government  or  self- 
defense,  was  in  actual  fact  almost  immediately  annexed 
to  Japan. 

We  made  the  promise  to  give  Cuba  independence ;  and  we 
kept  the  promise.  Leonard  Wood  was  left  in  as  Governor 
for  two  or  three  years,  and  evolved  order  out  of  chaos, 
raising  the  administration  of  the  island  to  a  level,  moral 


MONROE    DOCTRINE    AND    PANAMA    CANAL       505 

and  material,  which  it  had  never  before  achieved.  We  also 
by  treaty  gave  the  Cubans  substantial  advantages  in  our 
markets.  Then  we  left  the  island,  turning  the  government 
over  to  its  own  people.  After  four  or  five  years  a  revolu 
tion  broke  out,  during  my  administration,  and  we  again  had 
to  intervene  to  restore  order.  We  promptly  sent  thither  a 
small  army  of  pacification.  Under  General  Barry,  order 
was  restored  and  kept,  and  absolute  justice  done.  The 
American  troops  were  then  withdrawn  and  the  Cubans 
reestablished  in  complete  possession  of  their  own  beautiful 
island,  and  they  are  in  possession  of  it  now.  There  are 
plenty  of  occasions  in  our  history  when  we  have  shown 
weakness  or  inefficiency,  and  some  occasions  when  we  have 
not  been  as  scrupulous  as  we  should  have  been  as  regards 
the  rights  of  others.  But  I  know  of  no  action  by  any  other 
government  in  relation  to  a  weaker  power  which  showed 
such  disinterested  efficiency  in  rendering  service  as  was 
true  in  connection  with  our  intervention  in  Cuba. 

In  Cuba,  as  in  the  Philippines  and  as  in  Porto  Rico, 
Santo  Domingo,  and  later  in  Panama,  no  small  part  of  our 
success  was  due  to  the  fact  that  we  put  in  the  highest  grade 
of  men  as  public  officials.  This  practice  was  inaugurated 
under  President  McKinley.  I  found  admirable  men  in 
office,  and  I  continued  them  and  appointed  men  like  them 
as  their  successors.  The  way  that  the  custom-houses  in 
Santo  Domingo  were  administered  by  Colton  definitely 
established  the  success  of  our  experiment  in  securing  peace 
for  that  island  republic;  and  in  Porto  Eico,  under  the 
administration  of  affairs  under  such  officials  as  Hunt, 
Winthrop,  Post,  Ward  and  Grahame,  more  substantial 
progress  was  achieved  in  a  decade  than  in  any  previous 
rentury. 

The  Philippines,  Cuba,  and  Porto  Eico  came  within  our 
own  sphere  of  governmental  action.  In  addition  to  this  we 
asserted  certain  rights  in  the  Western  Hemisphere  under 
the  Monroe  Doctrine.  My  endeavor  was  not  only  to  assert 
these  rights,  but  frankly  and  fully  to  acknowledge  the  duties 
that  went  with  the  rights. 


506    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

The  Monroe  Doctrine  lays  down  the  rule  that  the  "West 
ern  Hemisphere  is  not  hereafter  to  be  treated  as  subject  to 
settlement  and  occupation  by  Old  World  powers.  It  is  not 
international  law;  but  it  is  a  cardinal  principle  of  our 
foreign  policy.  There  is  no  difficulty  at  the  present  day 
in  maintaining  this  doctrine,  save  where  the  American 
power  whose  interest  is  threatened  has  shown  itself  in  in 
ternational  matters  both  weak  and  delinquent.  The  great 
and  prosperous  civilized  commonwealths,  such  as  the  Ar 
gentine,  Brazil,  and  Chile,  in  the  southern  half  of  South 
America,  have  advanced  so  far  that  they  no  longer  stand 
in  any  position  of  tutelage  toward  the  United  States.  They 
occupy  toward  us  precisely  the  position  that  Canada  oc 
cupies.  Their  friendship  is  the  friendship  of  equals  for 
equals.  My  view  was  that  as  regards  these  nations  there 
was  no  more  necessity  for  asserting  the  Monroe  Doctrine 
than  there  was  to  assert  it  in  regard  to  Canada.  They  were 
competent  to  assert  it  for  themselves.  Of  course  if  one  of 
these  nations,  or  if  Canada,  should  be  overcome  by  some 
Old  World  power,  which  then  proceeded  to  occupy  its  terri 
tory,  we  would  undoubtedly,  if  the  American  Nation  needed 
our  help,  give  it  in  order  to  prevent  such  occupation  from 
taking  place.  But  the  initiative  would  come  from  the  Na 
tion  itself,  and  the  United  States  would  merely  act  as  a 
friend  whose  help  was  invoked. 

The  case  was  (and  is)  widely  different  as  regards  certain 
— not  all — of  the  tropical  states  in  the  neighborhood  of  the 
Caribbean  Sea.  Where  these  states  are  stable  and  pros 
perous,  they  stand  on  a  footing  of  absolute  equality  with  all 
other  communities.  But  some  of  them  have  been  a  prey 
to  such  continuous  revolutionary  misrule  as  to  have  grown 
impotent  either  to  do  their  duties  to  outsiders  or  to  enforce 
their  rights  against  outsiders.  The  United  States  has  not 
the  slightest  desire  to  make  aggressions  on  any  one  of  these 
states.  On  the  contrary,  it  will  submit  to  much  from  them 
without  showing  resentment.  If  any  great  civilized  power, 
Russia  or  Germany,  for  instance,  had  behaved  toward  us  as 
Venezuela  under  Castro  behaved,  this  country  would  have 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   507 

gone  to  war  at  once.  We  did  not  go  to  war  with  Venezuela 
merely  because  our  people  declined  to  be  irritated  by  the 
actions  of  a  weak  opponent,  and  showed  a  forbearance 
which  probably  went  beyond  the  limits  of  wisdom  in  refus 
ing  to  take  umbrage  at  what  was  done  by  the  weak;  al 
though  we  would  certainly  have  resented  it  had  it  been  done 
by  the  strong.  In  the  case  of  two  states,  however,  affairs 
reached  such  a  crisis  that  we  had  to  act.  These  two  states 
were  Santo  Domingo  and  the  then  owner  of  the  Isthmus  of 
Panama,  Colombia. 

The  Santo  Domingan  case  was  the  less  important;  and 
yet  it  possessed  a  real  importance,  and  moreover  is  in 
structive  because  the  action  there  taken  should  serve  as  a 
precedent  for  American  action  in  all  similar  cases.  During 
the  early  years  of  my  administration  Santo  Domingo  was 
in  its  usual  condition  of  chronic  revolution.  There  was 
always  fighting,  always  plundering;  and  the  successful 
graspers  for  governmental  power  were  always  pawning 
ports  and  custom-houses,  or  trying  to  put  them  up  as 
guarantees  for  loans.  Of  course  the  foreigners  who  made 
loans  under  such  conditions  demanded  exorbitant  interest, 
and  if  they  were  Europeans  expected  their  governments 
to  stand  by  them.  So  utter  was  the  disorder  that  on  one 
occasion  when  Admiral  Dewey  landed  to  pay  a  call  of 
ceremony  on  the  President,  he  and  his  party  were  shot  at 
by  revolutionists  in  crossing  the  square,  and  had  to  return 
to  the  ships,  leaving  the  call  unpaid.  There  was  default 
on  the  interest  due  to  the  creditors;  and  finally  the  latter 
insisted  upon  their  governments  intervening.  Two  or  three 
of  the  European  powers  were  endeavoring  to  arrange  for 
concerted  action,  and  I  was  finally  notified  that  these  powers 
intended  to  take  and  hold  several  of  the  seaports  which 
held  custom-houses. 

This  meant  that  unless  I  acted  at  once  I  would  find 
foreign  powers  in  partial  possession  of  Santo  Domingo ;  in 
which  event  the  very  individuals  who,  in  the  actual  event 
deprecated  the  precaution  taken  to  prevent  such  action, 
would  have  advocated  extreme  and  violent  measures  to 


508    THEODORE    KOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

undo  the  effect  of  their  own  supineness.  Nine-tenths  of 
wisdom  is  to  be  wise  in  time,  and  at  the  right  time ;  and  my 
whole  foreign  policy  was  based  on  the  exercise  of  intelli 
gent  forethought  and  of  decisive  action  sufficiently  far  in 
advance  of  any  likely  crisis  to  make  it  improbable  that  we 
would  run  into  serious  trouble. 

Santo  Domingo  had  fallen  into  such  chaos  that  once  for 
some  weeks  there  were  two  rival  governments  in  it,  and  a 
revolution  was  being  carried  on  against  each.  At  one 
period  one  government  was  at  sea  in  a  small  gunboat,  but 
still  stoutly  maintained  that  it  was  in  possession  of  the 
island  and  entitled  to  make  loans  and  declare  peace  or  war. 
The  situation  had  become  intolerable  by  the  time  that  I 
interfered.  There  was  a  naval  commander  in  the  waters 
whom  I  directed  to  prevent  any  fighting  which  might  men 
ace  the  custom-houses.  He  carried  out  his  orders,  both  to 
his  and  my  satisfaction,  in  thoroughgoing  fashion.  On  one 
occasion,  when  an  insurgent  force  threatened  to  attack  a 
town  in  which  Americans  had  interests,  he  notified  the  com 
manders  on  both  sides  that  he  would  not  permit  any  fight 
ing  in  the  town,  but  that  he  would  appoint  a  certain  place 
where  they  could  meet  and  fight  it  out,  and  that  the  victors 
should  have  the  town.  They  agreed  to  meet  his  wishes,  the 
fight  came  off  at  the  appointed  place,  and  the  victors,  who 
if  I  remember  rightly  were  the  insurgents,  were  given  the 
town. 

It  was  the  custom-houses  that  caused  the  trouble,  for  they 
'offered  the  only  means  of  raising  money,  and  the  revolu 
tions  were  carried  on  to  get  possession  of  them.  Accord 
ingly  I  secured  an  agreement  with  the  governmental  au 
thorities,  who  for  the  moment  seemed  best  able  to  speak 
for  the  country,  by  which  these  custom-houses  were  placed 
under  American  control.  The  arrangement  was  that  we 
should  keep  order  and  prevent  any  interference  with  the 
custom-houses  or  the  places  where  they  stood,  and  should 
collect  the  revenues.  Forty-five  per  cent  of  the  revenue  was 
then  turned  over  to  the  Santo  Domingan  Government,  and 
fifty-five  per  cent  put  in  a  sinking  fund  in  New  York  for 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   500 

the  benefit  of  the  creditors.  The  arrangement  worked  in 
capital  style.  On  the  forty-five  per  cent  basis  the  Santo 
Donaingan  Government  received  from  us  a  larger  sum  than 
it  had  ever  received  before  when  nominally  all  the  revenue 
went  to  it.  The  creditors  were  entirely  satisfied  with  the 
arrangement,  and  no  excuse  for  interference  by  European 
powers  remained.  Occasional  disturbances  occurred  in 
the  island,  of  course,  but  on  the  whole  there  ensued  a 
degree  of  peace  and  prosperity  which  the  island  had  not 
known  before  for  at  least  a  century. 

All  this  was  done  without  the  loss  of  a  life,  with  the  as 
sent  of  all  the  parties  in  interest,  and  without  subjecting 
the  United  States  to  any  charge,  wrhile  practically  all  of  the 
interference,  after  the  naval  commander  whom  I  have  men 
tioned  had  taken  the  initial  steps  in  preserving  order,  con 
sisted  in  putting  a  first-class  man  trained  in  our  insular 
service  at  the  head  of  the  Santo  Domingan  customs  service. 
We  secured  peace,  we  protected  the  people  of  the  islands 
against  foreign  foes,  and  we  minimized  the  chance  of  do 
mestic  trouble.  We  satisfied  the  creditors  and  the  foreign 
nations  to  which  the  creditors  belonged;  and  our  own  part 
of  the  work  was  done  with  the  utmost  efficiency  and  with 
rigid  honesty,  so  that  not  a  particle  of  scandal  was  ever 
so  much  as  hinted  at. 

Under  these  circumstances  those  who  do  not  know  the 
nature  of  the  professional  international  philanthropists 
would  suppose  that  these  apostles  of  international  peace 
would  have  been  overjoyed  with  what  we  had  done.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  when  they  took  any  notice  of  it  at  all  it  was 
to  denounce  it ;  and  those  American  newspapers  which  are 
fondest  of  proclaiming  themselves  the  foes  of  war  and  the 
friends  of  peace  violently  attacked  me  for  averting  war 
from,  and  bringing  peace  to,  the  island.  They  insisted  I 
had  no  power  to  make  the  agreement,  and  demanded  the 
rejection  of  the  treaty  which  was  to  perpetuate  the  agree 
ment.  They  were,  of  course,  wholly  unable  to  advance  a 
single  sound  reason  of  any  kind  for  their  attitude.  I  sup 
pose  the  real  explanation  was  partly  their  dislike  of  me 


510    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

personally,  and  unwillingness  to  see  peace  come  tkrongK 
or  national  honor  upheld  by  me ;  and  in  the  next  place  their 
sheer,  simple  devotion  to  prattle  and  dislike  of  efficiency. 
They  liked  to  have  people  come  together  and  talk  about 
peace,  or  even  sign  bits  of  paper  with  something  about 
peace  or  arbitration  on  them,  but  they  took  no  interest 
whatever  in  the  practical  achievement  of  a  peace  that  told 
for  good  government  and  decency  and  honesty.  They  were 
joined  by  the  many  moderately  well-meaning  men  who  al 
ways  demand  that  a  thing  be  done,  but  also  always  demand 
that  it  be  not  done  in  the  only  way  in  which  it  is,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  possible  to  do  it.  The  men  of  this  kind  insisted  that 
of  course  Santo  Domingo  must  be  protected  and  made  to 
behave  itself,  and  that  of  course  the  Panama  Canal  must 
be  dug;  but  they  insisted  even  more  strongly  that  neither 
feat  should  be  accomplished  in  the  only  way  in  which  it 
was  possible  to  accomplish  it  at  all. 

The  Constitution  did  not  explicitly  give  me  power  to 
bring  about  the  necessary  agreement  with  Santo  Domingo. 
But  the  Constitution  did  not  forbid  my  doing  what  I  did. 
I  put  the  agreement  into  effect,  and  I  continued  its  execu 
tion  for  two  years  before  the  Senate  acted;  and  I  would 
have  continued  it  until  the  end  of  my  term,  if  necessary, 
without  any  action  by  Congress.  But  it  was  far  preferable 
that  there  should  be  action  by  Congress,  so  that  we  might  be 
proceeding  under  a  treaty  which  was  the  law  of  the  land 
and  not  merely  by  a  direction  of  the  Chief  Executive  which 
would  lapse  when  that  particular  executive  left  office.  I 
therefore  did  my  best  to  get  the  Senate  to  ratify  what  I  had 
done.  There  was  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  about  it.  With 
the  exception  of  one  or  two  men  like  Clark  of  Arkansas,  the 
Democratic  Senators  acted  in  that  spirit  of  unworthy  par 
tisanship  which  subordinates  national  interest  to  some  fan 
cied  partisan  advantage,  and  they  were  cordially  backed  by 
all  that  portion  of  the  press  which  took  its  inspiration  from 
"Wall  Street,  and  was  violently  hostile  to  the  Administra 
tion  because  of  its  attitude  towards  great  corporations. 
Most  of  the  Kepublican  Senators  under  the  lead  of  Senator 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   511 

Lodge  stood  by  me;  but  some  of  them,  of  the  more  "con 
servative"  or  reactionary  type,  who  were  already  growing 
hostile  to  me  on  the  trust  question,  first  proceeded  to  sneer 
at  what  had  been  done,  and  to  raise  all  kinds  of  meticulous 
objections,  which  they  themselves  finally  abandoned,  but 
which  furnished  an  excuse  on  which  the  opponents  of  the 
treaty  could  hang  adverse  action.  Unfortunately  the  Sena 
tors  who  were  most  apt  to  speak  of  the  dignity  of  the 
Senate,  and  to  insist  upon  its  importance,  were  the  very 
ones  who  were  also  most  apt  to  try  to  make  display  of  this 
dignity  and  importance  by  thwarting  the  public  business. 
This  case  was  typical.  The  Republicans  in  question  spoke 
against  certain  provisions  of  the  proposed  treaty.  They 
then,  having  ingeniously  provided  ammunition  for  the  foes 
of  the  treaty,  abandoned  their  opposition  to  it,  and  the 
Democrats  stepped  into  the  position  they  had  abandoned. 
Enough  Eepublicans  were  absent  to  prevent  the  securing 
of  a  two-thirds  vote  for  the  treaty,  and  the  Senate  ad 
journed  without  any  action  at  all,  and  with  a  feeling  of 
entire  self-satisfaction  at  having  left  the  country  in  the 
position  of  assuming  a  responsibility  and  then  failing  to 
fulfil  it.  Apparently  the  Senators  in  question  felt  that  in 
some  way  they  had  upheld  their  dignity.  All  that  they 
had  really  done  was  to  shirk  their  duty.  Somebody  had  to 
do  that  duty,  and  accordingly  I  did  it.  I  went  ahead  and 
administered  the  proposed  treaty  anyhow,  considering  it 
as  a  simple  agreement  on  the  part  of  the  Executive  which 
would  be  converted  into  a  treaty  whenever  the  Senate  acted. 
After  a  couple  of  years  the  Senate  did  act,  having  pre 
viously  made  some  utterly  unimportant  changes  which  I 
ratified  and  persuaded  Santo  Domingo  to  ratify.  In  all  its 
history  Santo  Domingo  has  had  nothing  happen  to  it  as 
fortunate  as  this  treaty,  and  the  passing  of  it  saved  the 
United  States  from  having  to  face  serious  difficulties  with 
one  or  more  foreign  powers. 

It  cannot  in  the  long  run  prove  possible  for  the  United 
States  to  protect  delinquent  American  nations  from  punish 
ment  for  the  non-performance  of  their  duties  unless  sh,e 


512    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

undertakes  to  make  them  perform  their  duties.  People 
may  theorize  about  this  as  much  as  they  wish,  but  when 
ever  a  sufficiently  strong  outside  nation  becomes  sufficiently 
aggrieved,  then  either  that  nation  will  act  or  the  United 
States  Government  itself  will  have  to  act.  We  were  face  to 
face  at  one  period  of  my  administration  with  this  condition 
of  affairs  in  Venezuela,  when  Germany,  rather  feebly 
backed  by  England,  undertook  a  blockade  against  Vene 
zuela  to  make  Venezuela  adopt  the  German  and  English 
view  about  certain  agreements.  There  was  real  danger 
that  the  blockade  would  finally  result  in  Germany's  taking 
possession  of  certain  cities  or  custom-houses.  I  succeeded, 
however,  in  getting  all  the  parties  in  interest  to  submit 
their  cases  to  the  Hague  Tribunal. 

By  far  the  most  important  action  I  took  in  foreign  affairs 
during  the  time  I  was  President  related  to  the  Panama 
Canal.  Here  again  there  was  much  accusation  about  my 
having  acted  in  an  "  unconstitutional "  manner — a  position 
which  can  be  upheld  only  if  Jefferson 's  action  in  acquiring 
Louisiana  be  also  treated  as  unconstitutional;  and  at  dif 
ferent  stages  of  the  affair  believers  in  a  do-nothing  policy 
denounced  me  as  having  " usurped  authority" — which 
meant,  that  when  nobody  else  could  or  would  exercise  effi 
cient  authority,  I  exercised  it. 

During  the  nearly  four  hundred  years  that  had  elapsed 
since  Balboa  crossed  the  Isthmus,  there  had  been  a  good 
deal  of  talk  about  building  an  Isthmus  canal,  and  there 
had  been  various  discussions  of  the  subject  and  negotia 
tions  about  it  in  Washington  for  the  previous  half  century. 
So  far  it  had  all  resulted  merely  in  conversation;  and  the 
time  had  come  when  unless  somebody  was  prepared  to  act 
with  decision  we  would  have  to  resign  ourselves  to  at  least 
half  a  century  of  further  conversation.  Under  the  Hay- 
Pauncef ote  Treaty  signed  shortly  after  I  became  President, 
and  thanks  to  our  negotiations  with  the  French  Panama 
Company,  the  United  States  at  last  acquired  a  possession, 
so  far  as  Europe  was  concerned,  which  warranted  her  in 
immediately  undertaking  the  task.  It  remained  to  decide 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   513 

where  the  canal  should  be,  whether  along  the  line  already 
pioneered  by  the  French  company  in  Panama,  or  in  Nica 
ragua.  Panama  belonged  to  the  Eepublic  of  Colombia. 
Nicaragua  bid  eagerly  for  the  privilege  of  having  the 
United  States  build  the  canal  through  her  territory.  As 
long  as  it  was  doubtful  which  route  we  would  decide  upon, 
Colombia  extended  every  promise  of  friendly  cooperation: 
at  the  Pan-American  Congress  in  Mexico  her  delegate 
joined  in  the  unanimous  vote  which  requested  the  United 
States  forthwith  to  build  the  canal;  and  at  her  eager  re 
quest  we  negotiated  the  Hay-Herran  Treaty  with  her,  which 
gave  us  the  right  to  build  the  canal  across  Panama.  A 
board  of  experts  sent  to  the  Isthmus  had  reported  that  this 
route  was  better  than  the  Nicaragua  route,  and  that  it 
would  be  well  to  build  the  canal  over  it  provided  we  could 
purchase  the  rights  of  the  French  company  for  forty 
million  dollars;  but  that  otherwise  they  would  advise  tak 
ing  the  Nicaragua  route.  Ever  since  1846  we  had  had  a 
treaty  with  the  power  then  in  control  of  the  Isthmus,  the 
Eepublic  of  New  Granada,  the  predecessor  of  the  Eepublic 
of  Colombia  and  of  the  present  Eepublic  of  Panama,  by 
which  treaty  the  United  States  wras  guaranteed  free  and 
open  right  of  way  across  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  by  any 
mode  of  communication  that  might  be  constructed,  wiiile  in 
return  our  Government  guaranteed  the  perfect  neutrality 
of  the  Isthmus  with  a  view  to  the  preservation  of  free 
transit. 

For  nearly  fifty  years  we  had  asserted  the  right  to  pre 
vent  the  closing  of  this  highway  of  commerce.  Secretary 
of  State  Cass  in  1858  officially  stated  the  American  position 
as  follows: 

"Sovereignty  has  its  duties  as  well  as  its  rights,  and  none 
of  these  local  governments,  even  if  administered  with  more 
regard  to  the  just  demands  of  other  nations  than  they  have 
been,  would  be  permitted,  in  a  spirit  of  Eastern  isolation,  to 
close  the  gates  of  intercourse  of  the  great  highways  of  the 
world,  and  justify  the  act  by  the  pretension  that  these 
avenues  of  trade  and  travel  belong  to  them  and  that 


514    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

choose  to  shut  them,  or,  what  is  almost  equivalent,  to  en 
cumber  them  with  such  unjust  relations  as  would  prevent 
their  general  use." 

We  had  again  and  again  been  forced  to  intervene  to  pro 
tect  the  transit  across  the  Isthmus,  and  the  intervention  was 
frequently  at  the  request  of  Colombia  herself.  The  effort 
to  build  a  canal  by  private  capital  had  been  made  under 
De  Lesseps  and  had  resulted  in  lamentable  failure.  Every 
serious  proposal  to  build  the  canal  in  such  manner  had  been 
abandoned.  The  United  States  had  repeatedly  announced 
that  we  would  not  permit  it  to  be  built  or  controlled  by  any 
old-world  government.  Colombia  was  utterly  impotent  to 
build  it  herself.  Under  these  circumstances  it  had  become 
a  matter  of  imperative  obligation  that  we  should  build  it 
ourselves  without  further  delay. 

I  took  final  action  in  1903.  During  the  preceding  fifty- 
three  years  the  Governments  of  New  Granada  and  of  its 
successor,  Colombia,  had  been  in  a  constant  state  of  flux; 
and  the  State  of  Panama  had  sometimes  been  treated  as  al 
most  independent,  in  a  loose  Federal  league,  and  sometimes 
as  the  mere  property  of  the  Government  at  Bogota;  and 
there  had  been  innumerable  appeals  to  arms,  sometimes 
for  adequate,  sometimes  for  inadequate,  reasons.  The  fol 
lowing  is  a  partial  list  of  the  disturbances  on  the  Isthmus  of 
Panama  during  the  period  in  question,  as  reported  to  us 
by  our  consuls.  It  is  not  possible  to  give  a  complete  list, 
and  some  of  the  reports  that  speak  of  "revolutions"  must 
mean  unsuccessful  revolutions: 

May  22,  1850. — Outbreak;  two  Americans  killed.  War 
vessel  demanded  to  quell  outbreak. 

October,  1850. — Eevolutionary  plot  to  bring  about  inde 
pendence  of  the  Isthmus. 

July  22,  1851. — Revolution  in  four  Southern  provinces. 

November  14,  1851. — Outbreak  at  Chagres.  Man-of-war 
requested  for  Chagres. 

June  27,  1853. — Insurrection  at  Bogota,  and  consequent 
disturbance  on  Isthmus.  War  vessel  demanded. 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   5l5 

May  23,  1854. — Political  disturbances.  War  vessel  re 
quested. 

June  28,  1854. — Attempted  revolution. 

October  24,  1854. — Independence  of  Isthmus  demanded 
by  provincial  legislature. 

April,  1856. — Eiot,  and  massacre  of  Americans. 

May  4, 1856.— Riot. 

May  18,  1856.— Eiot. 

June  3,  1856.— Eiot. 

October  2,  1856. — Conflict  between  two  native  parties. 
United  States  force  landed. 

December  18,  1858. — Attempted  secession  of  Panama. 

April,  1859.— Eiots. 

September,  I860.— Outbreak. 

October  4,  1860. — Landing  of  United  States  forces  in 
consequence. 

May  23,  1861.— Intervention  of  the  United  States  forces 
required,  by  intendente. 

October  2,  1861. — Insurrection  and  civil  war. 

April  4,  1862. — Measures  to  prevent  rebels  crossing 
Isthmus. 

June  13,  1862. — Mosquera's  troops  refused  admittance 
to  Panama. 

March,  1865. — Eevolution,  and  United  States  troops 
landed. 

August,  1865. — Eiots;  unsuccessful  attempt  to  invade 
Panama. 

March,  1866. — Unsuccessful  revolution. 

April,  1867. — Attempt  to  overthrow  Government. 

August,  1867. — Attempt  at  revolution. 

July  5,  1868. — Eevolution;  provisional  government  in 
augurated. 

August  29,  1868. — Eevolution;  provisional  government 
overthrown. 

April,  1871. — Eevolution;  followed  apparently  by  coun 
ter  revolution. 

April,  1873. — Eevolution  and  civil  war  which  lasted  to 
October,  1875. 


516    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

August,  1876.— Civil  war  which  lasted  until  April,  1877. 

July,  1878.— Eebellion. 

December,  1878.— Revolt. 

April,  1879. — Revolution. 

June,  1879. — Revolution. 

March,  1883.— Riot. 

May,  1883.— Riot. 

June,  1884. — Revolutionary  attempt. 

December,  1884. — Revolutionary  attempt. 

January,  1885. — Revolutionary  disturbances. 

March,  1885. — Revolution. 

April,  1887. — Disturbance  on  Panama  Railroad. 

November,  1887. — Disturbance  on  line  of  canal. 

January,  1889.— Riot. 

January,  1895. — Revolution  which  lasted  until  April 

March,  1895. — Incendiary  attempt. 

October,  1899.— Revolution. 

February,  1900,  to  July,  1900.— Revolution. 

January,  1901. — Revolution. 

July,  1901. — Revolutionary  disturbances. 

September,  1901. — City  of  Colon  taken  by  rebels. 

March,  1902. — Revolutionary  disturbances. 

July,  1902.— Revolution. 

The  above  is  only  a  partial  list  of  the  revolutions,  rebel 
lions,  insurrections,  riots,  and  other  outbreaks  that  occurred 
during  the  period  in  question;  yet  they  number  fifty-three 
for  the  fifty-three  years,  and  they  showed  a  tendency  to 
increase,  rather  than  decrease,  in  numbers  and  intensity. 
One  of  them  lasted  for  nearly  three  years  before  it  was 
quelled ;  another  for  nearly  a  year.  In  short,  the  experience 
of  over  half  a  century  had  shown  Colombia  to  be  utterly 
incapable  of  keeping  order  on  the  Isthmus.  Only  the  active 
interference  of  the  United  States  had  enabled  her  to  pre 
serve  so  much  as  a  semblance  of  sovereignty.  Had  it  not 
been  for  the  exercise  by  the  United  States  of  the  police 
power  in  her  interest,  her  connection  with  the  Isthmus 
would  have  been  sundered  long  before  it  was.  In  1856,  in 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   :A1 

1860,  in  1873,  in  1885,  in  1901,  and  again  in  1902,  sailors 
and  marines  from  United  States  warships  were  forced  to 
land  in  order  to  patrol  the  Isthmus,  to  protect  life  and 
property,  and  to  see  that  the  transit  across  the  Isthmus 
was  kept  open.  In  1861,  in  1862,  in  1885,  and  in  1900,  the 
Colombian  Government  asked  that  the  United  States  Gov 
ernment  would  land  troops  to  protect  Colombian  interests 
and  maintain  order  on  the  Isthmus.  The  people  of  Panama 
during  the  preceding  twenty  years  had  three  times  sought 
to  establish  their  independence  by  revolution  or  secession 
-in  1885,  in  1895,  and  in  1899. 

The  peculiar  relations  of  the  United  States  toward  the 
Isthmus,  and  the  acquiescence  by  Colombia  in  acts  which 
were  quite  incompatible  with  the  theory  of  her  having  an 
absolute  and  unconditioned  sovereignty  on  the  Isthmus,  are 
illustrated  by  the  following  three  telegrams  between  two 
of  our  naval  officers  whose  ships  were  at  the  Isthmus,  and 
the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  on  the  occasion  of  the  first  out 
break  that  occurred  on  the  Isthmus  after  I  became  Presi 
dent  (a  year  before  Panama  became  independent) : 

September  12,  1902. 
Ranger,  Panama: 

United  States  guarantees  perfect  neutrality  of  Isthmus 
and  that  a  free  transit  from  sea  to  sea  be  not  interrupted 
or  embarrassed.  .  .  .  Any  transportation  of  croops  which 
might  contravene  these  provisions  of  treaty  should  not  be 
sanctioned  by  you,  nor  should  use  of  road  be  permitted 
which  might  convert  the  line  of  transit  into  theater  of 
hostility. 

MOODY. 

COLON,  September  20,  1902. 
Secretary  Navy,  Washington: 

Everything  is  conceded.  The  United  States  guards  and 
guarantees  traffic  and  the  line  of  transit.  To-day  I  per 
mitted  the  exchange  of  Colombian  troops  from  Panama  to 
Colon,  about  1,000  men  each  way,  the  troops  without  arms 


518    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

in  trains  guarded  by  American  naval  force  in  the  same 
manner  as  other  passengers ;  arms  and  ammunition  in  sepa 
rate  train,  guarded  also  by  naval  force  in  the  same  manner 
as  other  freight. 

McLEAN. 

Secretary  Navy,  % ;      PANAMA'  °Ct°ber  3'  19°2' 

Washington,  D.  C.: 

Have  sent  this  communication  to  the  American  Consul  at 
Panama : 

"Inform  Governor,  while  trains  running  under  United 
States  protection,  I  must  decline  transportation  any  com 
batants,  ammunition,  arms,  which  might  cause  interruption 
to  traffic  or  convert  line  of  transit  into  theater  hostilities." 

CASEY. 

When  the  Government  in  nominal  control  of  the  Isthmus 
continually  besought  American  interference  to  protect  the 
"rights"  it  could  not  itself  protect,  and  permitted  our 
Government  to  transport  Colombian  troops  unarmed,  under 
protection  of  our  own  armed  men,  while  the  Colombian 
arms  and  ammunition  came  in  a  separate  train,  it  is  obvious 
that  the  Colombian  "sovereignty"  was  of  such  a  character 
as  to  warrant  our  insisting  that  inasmuch  as  it  only  existed 
because  of  our  protection  there  should  be  in  requital  a  sense 
of  the  obligations  that  the  acceptance  of  this  protection 
implied. 

Meanwhile  Colombia  was  under  a  dictatorship.  In  1898 
M.  A.  Sanelamente  was  elected  President,  and  J.  M.  Maro- 
quin  Vice-President,  of  the  Republic  of  Colombia.  On  July 
31,  1900,  the  Vice-President,  Maroquin,  executed  a  "coup 
d'etat"  by  seizing  the  person  of  the  President,  Sanelamente, 
and  imprisoning  him  at  a  place  a  few  miles  out  of  Bogota. 
Maroquin  thereupon  declared  himself  possessed  of  the  ex 
ecutive  power  because  of  "the  absence  of  the  President" — 
a  delightful  touch  of  unconscious  humor.  He  then  issued 
a  decree  that  public  order  was  disturbed,  and,  upon  that 


MONROE   DOCTRINE   AND   PANAMA  CANAL      519 

ground,  assumed  to  himself  legislative  power  under  another 
provision  of  the  constitution;  that  is,  having  himself  dis 
turbed  the  public  order,  he  alleged  the  disturbance  as  a 
justification  for  seizing  absolute  power.  Thenceforth  Maro- 
quin,  without  the  aid  of  any  legislative  body,  ruled  as  a 
dictator,  combining  the  supreme  executive,  legislative,  civil, 
and  military  authorities,  in  the  so-called  Republic  of  Co 
lombia.  The  "  absence "  of  Sanclamente  from  the  capital 
became  permanent  by  his  death  in  prison  in  the  year  1902. 
When  the  people  of  Panama  declared  their  independence  in 
November,  1903,  no  Congress  had  sat  in  Colombia  since  the 
year  1898,  except  the  special  Congress  called  by  Maroquin 
to  reject  the  canal  treaty,  r;id  which  did  reject  it  by  a  unani 
mous  vote,  and  adjourned  without  legislating  on  any  other 
subject.  The  constitution  of  1886  had  taken  away  from 
Panama  the  power  of  self-government  and  vested  it  in 
Colombia.  The  coup  d'etat  of  Maroquin  took  away  from 
Colombia  herself  the  power  of  government  and  vested  it  in 
an  irresponsible  dictator. 

Consideration  of  the  above  facts  ought  to  be  enough  to 
show  any  human  being  that  we  were  not  dealing  with  nor 
mal  conditions  on  the  Isthmus  and  in  Colombia.  We  were 
dealing  with  the  government  of  an  irresponsible  alien  dic 
tator,  and  with  a  condition  of  affairs  on  the  Isthmus  itself 
which  was  marked  by  one  uninterrupted  series  of  outbreaks 
and  revolutions.  As  for  the  "consent  of  the  governed " 
theory,  that  absolutely  justified  our  action;  the  people  on 
the  Isthmus  were  the  " governed' ';  they  were  governed  by 
Colombia,  without  their  consent,  and  they  unanimously 
repudiated  the  Colombian  Government,  and  demanded  that 
the  United  States  build  the  canal. 

I  had  done  everything  possible,  personally  and  through 
Secretary  Hay,  to  persuade  the  Colombian  Government  to 
keep  faith.  Under  the  Hay-Pauncefote  Treaty,  it  was  ex 
plicitly  provided  that  the  United  States  should  build  the 
canal,  should  control,  police  and  protect  it,  and  keep  it  open 
to  the  vessels  of  all  nations  on  equal  terms.  We  had  as 
sumed  the  position  of  guarantor  of  the  canal,  including,  of 


520    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT— AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

course,  the  building  of  the  canal,  and  of  its  peaceful  use 
by  all  the  world.  The  enterprise  was  recognized  every 
where  as  responding  to  an  international  need.  It  was  a  mere 
travesty  on  justice  to  treat  the  government  in  possession 
of  the  Isthmus  as  having  the  right — which  Secretary  Cass 
forty-five  years  before  had  so  emphatically  repudiated — 
to  close  the  gates  of  intercourse  on  one  of  the  great  high 
ways  of  the  world.  When  we  submitted  to  Colombia  the 
Hay-Herran  Treaty,  it  had  been  settled  that  the  time  for 
delay,  the  time  for  permitting  any  government  of  anti-social 
character,  or  of  imperfect  development,  to  bar  the  work, 
had  passed.  The  United  States  had  assumed  in  connection 
with  the  canal  certain  responsibilities  not  only  to  its  own 
people,  but  to  the  civilized  world  which  imperatively  de 
manded  that  there  should  be  no  further  delay  in  beginning 
the  work.  The  Hay-Herran  Treaty,  if  it  erred  at  all,  erred 
in  being  overgenerous  toward  Colombia.  The  people  of 
Panama  were  delighted  with  the  treaty,  and  the  President 
of  Colombia,  who  embodied  in  his  own  person  the  entire 
government  of  Colombia,  had  authorized  the  treaty  to  be 
made.  But  after  the  treaty  had  been  made  the  Colombia 
Government  thought  it  had  the  matter  in  its  own  hands; 
and  the  further  thought,  equally  wicked  and  foolish,  came 
into  the  heads  of  the  people  in  control  at  Bogota  that  they 
would  seize  the  French  Company  at  the  end  of  another  year 
and  take  for  themselves  the  forty  million  dollars  which  the 
United  States  had  agreed  to  pay  the  Panama  Canal  Com 
pany. 

President  Maroquin,  through  his  Minister,  had  agreed  to 
the  Hay-Herran  Treaty  in  January,  1903.  He  had  the 
absolute  power  of  an  unconstitutional  dictator  to  keep  his 
promise  or  break  it.  He  determined  to  break  it.  To  fur 
nish  himself  an  excuse  for  breaking  it  he  devised  the  plan 
of  summoning  a  Congress  especially  called  to  reject  the 
canal  treaty.  This  the  Congress — a  Congress  of  mere  pup 
pets — did,  without  a  dissenting  vote ;  and  the  puppets  ad 
journed  forthwith  without  legislating  on  any  other  subject. 
The  fact  that  this  was  a  mere  sham,  and  that  the  President 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   521 

had  entire  power  to  confirm  his  own  treaty  and  act  on  it 
if  he  desired,  was  shown  as  soon  as  the  revolution  took 
place,  for  on  November  6  General  Eeyes,  of  Colombia,  ad 
dressed  the  American  Minister  at  Bogota,  on  behalf  of  Pres 
ident  Maroquin,  saying  that  "if  the  Government  of  the 
United  States  would  land  troops  and  restore  the  Colombian 
sovereign ty"  the  Colombian  President  would  "declare  mar 
tial  law;  and,  by  virtue  of  vested  constitutional  authority, 
when  public  order  is  disturbed,  would  approve  by  decree 
the  ratification  of  the  canal  treaty  as  signed;  or,  if  the 
Government  of  the  United  States  prefers,  would  call  an 
extra  session  of  the  Congress — with  new  and  friendly  mem 
bers — next  May  to  approve  the  treaty."  This,  of  course, 
is  proof  positive  that  the  Colombian  dictator  had  used  his 
Congress  as  a  mere  shield,  and  a  sham  shield  at  that,  and 
it  shows  how  utterly  useless  it  would  have  been  further  to 
trust  his  good  faith  in  the  matter. 

When,  in  August,  1903, 1  became  convinced  that  Colombia 
intended  to  repudiate  the  treaty  made  the  preceding  Janu 
ary,  under  cover  of  securing  its  rejection  by  the  Colombian 
Legislature,  I  began  carefully  to  consider  what  should  be 
done.  By  my  direction,  Secretary  Hay,  personally  and 
through  the  Minister  at  Bogota,  repeatedly  warned  Colom 
bia  that  grave  consequences  might  follow  her  rejection  of 
the  treaty.  The  possibility  of  ratification  did  not  wholly 
pass  away  until  the  close  of  the  session  of  the  Colombian 
Congress  on  the  last  day  of  October.  There  would  then 
be  two  possibilities.  One  was  that  Panama  would  remain 
quiet.  In  that  case  I  was  prepared  to  recommend  to  Con 
gress  that  we  should  at  once  occupy  the  Isthmus  anyhow, 
and  proceed  to  dig  the  canal ;  and  I  had  drawn  out  a  draft 
of  my  message  to  this  effect.1  But  from  the  information  I 
received,  I  deemed  it  likely  that  there  would  be  a  revolution 
in  Panama  as  soon  as  the  Colombian  Congress  adjourned 
without  ratifying  the  treaty,  for  the  entire  population  of 
Panama  felt  that  the  immediate  building  of  the  canal  was 
of  vital  concern  to  their  well-being.  Correspondents  of  the 

i  See  appendix  at  end  of  this  chapter. 


522    THEODORE    BOOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

different  newspapers  on  the  Isthmus  had  sent  to  their  re 
spective  papers  widely  published  forecasts  indicating  that 
there  would  be  a  revolution  in  such  event. 

Moreover,  on  October  16,  at  the  request  of  Lieutenant- 
General  Young,  Captain  Humphrey  and  Lieutenant  Mur 
phy,  two  army  officers  who  had  returned  from  the  Isthmus, 
saw  me  and  told  me  that  there  would  unquestionably  be  a 
revolution  on  the  Isthmus,  that  the  people  were  unanimous 
in  their  criticism  of  the  Bogota  Government  and  their  dis 
gust  over  the  failure  of  that  Government  to  ratify  the 
treaty;  and  that  the  revolution  would  probably  take  place 
immediately  after  the  adjournment  of  the  Colombian  Con 
gress.  They  did  not  believe  that  it  would  be  before  October 
20,  but  they  were  confident  that  it  would  certainly  come  at 
the  end  of  October  or  immediately  afterwards,  when  the 
Colombian  Congress  had  adjourned.  Accordingly  I  di 
rected  the  Navy  Department  to  station  various  ships  within 
easy  reach  of  the  Isthmus,  to  be  ready  to  act  in  the  event 
of  need  arising. 

These  ships  were  barely  in  time.  On  November  3  the 
revolution  occurred.  Practically  everybody  on  the  Isthmus, 
including  all  the  Colombian  troops  that  were  already  sta 
tioned  there,  joined  in  the  revolution,  and  there  was  no 
bloodshed.  But  on  that  same  day  four  hundred  new  Co 
lombian  troops  were  landed  at  Colon.  Fortunately,  the 
gunboat  Nashville,  under  Commander  Hubbard,  reached 
Colon  almost  immediately  afterwards,  and  when  the  com 
mander  of  the  Colombian  forces  threatened  the  lives  and 
property  of  the  American  citizens,  including  women  and 
children,  in  Colon,  Commander  Hubbard  landed  a  few  score 
sailors  and  marines  to  protect  them.  By  a  mixture  of  firm 
ness  and  tact  he  not  only  prevented  any  assault  on  our 
citizens,  but  persuaded  the  Colombian  commander  to  re- 
embark  his  troops  for  Cartagena.  On  the  Pacific  side  a 
Colombian  gunboat  shelled  the  City  of  Panama,  with  the 
result  of  killing  one  Chinaman — the  only  life  lost  in  the 
whole  affair. 

No  one  connected  with  the  American  Government  had  any 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   523 

part  in  preparing,  inciting,  or  encouraging  the  revolution, 
and  except  for  the  reports  of  our  military  and  naval  officers, 
which  I  forwarded  to  Congress,  no  one  connected  with  the 
Government  had  any  previous  knowledge  concerning  the 
proposed  revolution,  except  such  as  was  accessible  to  any 
person  who  read  the  newspapers  and  kept  abreast  of  cur 
rent  questions  and  current  affairs.  By  the  unanimous  ac 
tion  of  its  people,  and  without  the  firing  of  a  shot,  the  state 
of  Panama  declared  themselves  an  independent  republic. 
The  time  for  hesitation  on  our  part  had  passed. 

My  belief  then  was,  and  the  events  that  have  occurred 
since  have  more  than  justified  it,  that  from  the  standpoint 
of  the  United  States  it  was  imperative,  not  only  for  civil 
but  for  military  reasons,  that  there  should  be  the  immediate 
establishment  of  easy  and  speedy  communication  by  sea 
between  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific.  These  reasons  were 
not  of  convenience  only,  but  of  vital  necessity,  and  did  not 
admit  of  indefinite  delay.  The  action  of  Colombia  had 
shown  not  only  that  the  delay  would  be  indefinite,  but  that 
she  intended  to  confiscate  the  property  and  rights  of  the 
French  Panama  Canal  Company.  The  report  of  the  Pan 
ama  Canal  Committee  of  the  Colombian  Senate  on  October 
14,  1903,  on  the  proposed  treaty  with  the  United  States, 
proposed  that  all  consideration  of  the  matter  should  be 
postponed  until  October  31, 1904,  when  the  next  Colombian 
Congress  would  have  convened,  because  by  that  time  the 
new  Congress  would  be  in  condition  to  determine  whether 
through  lapse  of  time  the  French  company  had  not  forfeited 
its  property  and  rights.  "When  that  time  arrives,"  the 
report  significantly  declared,  "the  Eepublic,  without  any 
impediment,  will  be  able  to  contract  and  will  be  in  more 
clear,  more  definite  and  more  advantageous  possession,  both 
legally  and  materially."  The  naked  meaning  of  this  was 
that  Colombia  proposed  to  wait  a  year,  and  then  enforce  a 
forfeiture  of  the  rights  and  property  of  the  French  Panama 
Company,  so  as  to  secure  the  forty  million  dollars  our  Gov 
ernment  had  authorized  as  payment  to  this  company.  If 
we  had  sat  supine,  this  would  doubtless  have  meant  that 


524    THEOHORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

France  would  have  interfered  to  protect  the  company,  and 
we  should  then  have  had  on  the  Isthmus,  not  the  company, 
but  France;  and  the  gravest  international  complications 
might  have  ensued.  Every  consideration  of  international 
morality  and  expediency,  of  duty  to  the  Panama  people, 
and  of  satisfaction  of  our  own  national  interests  and  honor, 
bade  us  take  immediate  action.  I  recognized  Panama  forth 
with  on  behalf  of  the  United  States,  and  practically  all  the 
countries  of  the  world  immediately  followed  suit.  The  State 
Department  immediately  negotiated  a  canal  treaty  with  the 
new  Eepublic.  One  of  the  foremost  men  in  securing  the 
independence  of  Panama,  and  the  treaty  which  authorized 
the  United  States  forthwith  to  build  the  canal,  was  M. 
Philippe  Bunau-Varilla,  an  eminent  French  engineer  for 
merly  associated  with  De  Lesseps  and  then  living  on  the 
Isthmus;  his  services  to  civilization  were  notable,  and  de 
serve  the  fullest  recognition. 

From  the  beginning  to  the  end  our  course  was  straight 
forward  and  in  absolute  accord  with  the  highest  of  stand 
ards  of  international  morality.  Criticism  of  it  can  come 
only  from  misinformation,  or  else  from  a  sentimentality 
which  represents  both  mental  weakness  and  a  moral  twist. 
To  have  acted  otherwise  than  I  did  would  have  been  on  my 
part  betrayal  of  the  interests  of  the  United  States,  indiffer 
ence  to  the  interests  of  Panama,  and  recreancy  to  the  in 
terests  of  the  world  at  large.  Colombia  had  forfeited  every 
claim  to  consideration;  indeed,  this  is  not  stating  the  case 
strongly  enough:  she  had  so  acted  that  yielding  to  her 
would  have  meant  on  our  part  that  culpable  form  of  weak 
ness  which  stands  on  a  level  with  wickedness.  As  for  me 
personally,  if  I  had  hesitated  to  act,  and  had  not  in  advance 
discounted  the  clamor  of  those  Americans  who  have  made  a 
fetish  of  disloyalty  to  their  country,  I  should  have  esteemed 
myself  as  deserving  a  place  in  Dante's  inferno  beside  the 
faint-hearted  cleric  who  was  guilty  of  "il  gran  rifiuto." 
The  facts  I  have  given  above  are  mere  bald  statements  from 
the  record.  They  show  that  from  the  beginning  there  had 
been  acceptance  of  our  right  to  insist  on  free  transit,  in 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   525 

whatever  form  was  best,  across  the  Isthmus;  and  that 
towards  the  end  there  had  been  a  no  less  universal  feeling 
that  it  was  our  duty  to  the  world  to  provide  this  transit  in 
the  shape  of  a  canal — the  resolution  of  the  Pan-American 
Congress  was  practically  a  mandate  to  this  effect.  Colom 
bia  was  then  under  a  one-man  government,  a  dictatorship, 
founded  on  usurpation  of  absolute  and  irresponsible  power. 
She  eagerly  pressed  us  to  enter  into  an  agreement  with  her, 
as  long  as  there  was  any  chance  of  our  going  to  the  alter 
native  route  through  Nicaragua.  When  she  thought  we 
were  committed,  she  refused  to  fulfil  the  agreement,  with 
the  avowed  hope  of  seizing  the  French  company's  property 
for  nothing  and  thereby  holding  us  up.  This  was  a  bit  of 
pure  bandit  morality.  It  would  have  achieved  its  purpose 
had  I  possessed  as  weak  moral  fiber  as  those  of  my  critics 
who  announced  that  I  ought  to  have  confined  my  action  to 
feeble  scolding  and  temporizing  until  the  opportunity  for 
action  passed.  I  did  not  lift  my  finger  to  incite  the  revolu 
tionists.  The  right  simile  to  use  is  totally  different.  I  sim 
ply  ceased  to  stamp  out  the  different  revolutionary  fuses 
that  were  already  burning.  When  Colombia  committed 
flagrant  wrong  against  us,  I  considered  it  no  part  of  my 
duty  to  aid  and  abet  her  in  her  wrongdoing  at  our  expense, 
and  also  at  the  expense  of  Panama,  of  the  French  company, 
and  of  the  world  generally.  There  had  been  fifty  years  of 
continuous  bloodshed  and  civil  strife  in  Panama;  because 
of  my  action  Panama  has  now  known  ten  years  of  such 
peace  and  prosperity  as  she  never  before  saw  during  the 
four  centuries  of  her  existence — for  in  Panama,  as  in  Cuba 
and  Santo  Domingo,  it  was  the  action  of  the  American 
people,  against  the  outcries  of  the  professed  apostles  of 
peace,  which  alone  brought  peace.  We  gave  to  the  people 
of  Panama  self-government,  and  freed  them  from  subjec 
tion  to  alien  oppressors.  We  did  our  best  to  get  Colombia 
to  let  us  treat  her  with  a  more  than  generous  justice;  we 
exercised  patience  to  beyond  the  verge  of  proper  forbear 
ance.  When  we  did  act  and  recognize  Panama,  Colombia 
at  once  acknowledged  her  own  guilt  by  promptly  offering 


526    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

to  do  what  we  had  demanded,  and  what  she  had  protested 
it  was  not  in  her  power  to  do.  But  the  offer  came  too  late. 
What  we  would  gladly  have  done  before,  it  had  by  that 
time  become  impossible  for  us  honorably  to  do ;  for  it  would 
have  necessitated  our  abandoning  the  people  of  Panama, 
our  friends,  and  turning  them  over  to  their  and  our  foes, 
who  would  have  wreaked  vengeance  on  them  precisely  be 
cause  they  had  shown  friendship  to  us.  Colombia  was  solely 
responsible  for  her  own  humiliation ;  and  she  had  not  then, 
and  has  not  now,  one  shadow  of  claim  upon  us,  moral  or 
legal ;  all  the  wrong  that  was  done  was  done  by  her.  If,  as 
representing  the  American  people,  I  had  not  acted  precisely 
as  I  did,  I  would  have  been  an  unfaithful  or  incompetent 
representative ;  and  inaction  at  that  crisis  would  have  meant 
not  only  indefinite  delay  in  building  the  canal,  but  also 
practical  admission  on  our  part  that  we  were  not  fit  to  play 
the  part  on  the  Isthmus  which  we  had  arrogated  to  our 
selves.  I  acted  on  my  own  responsibility  in  the  Panama 
matter.  John  Hay  spoke  of  this  action  as  follows:  "The 
action  of  the  President  in  the  Panama  matter  is  not  only 
in  the  strictest  accordance  with  the  principles  of  justice  and 
equity,  and  in  line  with  all  the  best  precedents  of  our  public 
policy,  but  it  was  the  only  course  he  could  have  taken  in 
compliance  with  our  treaty  rights  and  obligations." 

I  deeply  regretted,  and  now  deeply  regret,  the  fact  that 
the  Colombian  Government  rendered  it  imperative  for  me 
to  take  the  action  I  took;  but  I  had  no  alternative,  consis 
tent  with  the  full  performance  of  my  duty  to  my  own  people, 
and  to  the  nations  of  mankind.  (For,  be  it  remembered, 
that  certain  other  nations,  Chile  for  example,  will  probably 
benefit  even  more  by  our  action  than  will  the  United  States 
itself.)  I  am  well  aware  that  the  Colombian  people  have 
many  fine  traits ;  that  there  is  among  them  a  circle  of  high 
bred  men  and  women  which  would  reflect  honor  on  the 
social  life  of  any  country;  and  that  there  has  been  an  in 
tellectual  and  literary  development  within  this  small  circle 
which  partially  atones  for  the  stagnation  and  illiteracy  of 
the  mass  of  the  people ;  and  I  also  know  that  even  the  illit- 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   527 

erate  mass  possesses  many  sterling  qualities.  But  unfor 
tunately  in  international  matters  every  nation  must  be 
judged  by  the  action  of  its  Government.  The  good  people 
in  Colombia  apparently  made  no  effort,  certainly  no  suc 
cessful  effort,  to  cause  the  Government  to  act  with  reason 
able  good  faith  towards  the  United  States;  and  Colombia 
had  to  take  the  consequences.  If  Brazil,  or  the  Argentine, 
or  Chile,  had  been  in  possession  of  the  Isthmus,  doubtless 
the  canal  would  have  been  built  under  the  governmental 
control  of  the  nation  thus  controlling  the  Isthmus,  with  the 
hearty  acquiescence  of  the  United  States  and  of  all  other 
powers.  But  in  the  actual  fact  the  canal  would  not  have 
been  built  at  all  save  for  the  action  I  took.  If  men  choose 
to  say  that  it  would  have  been  better  not  to  build  it,  than 
to  build  it  as  the  result  of  such  action,  their  position,  al 
though  foolish,  is  compatible  with  belief  in  their  wrong- 
headed  sincerity.  But  it  is  hypocrisy,  alike  odious  and  con 
temptible,  for  any  man  to  say  both  that  we  ought  to  have 
built  the  canal  and  that  we  ought  not  to  have  acted  in  the 
way  we  did  act. 

After  a  sufficient  period  of  wrangling,  the  Senate  ratified 
the  treaty  with  Panama,  and  work  on  the  canal  was  begun. 
The  first  thing  that  was  necessary  was  to  decide  the  type 
of  canal.  I  summoned  a  board  of  engineering  experts,  for 
eign  and  native.  They  divided  on  their  report.  The  ma 
jority  of  the  members,  including  all  the  foreign  members, 
approved  a  sea-level  canal.  The  minority,  including  most 
of  the  American  members,  approved  a  lock  canal.  Studying 
these  conclusions,  I  came  to  the  belief  that  the  minority  was 
right.  The  two  great  traffic  canals  of  the  world  were  the 
Suez  and  the  Soo.  The  Suez  Canal  is  a  sea-level  canal, 
and  it  was  the  one  best  known  to  European  engineers.  The 
Soo  Canal,  through  which  an  even  greater  volume  of  traffic 
passes  every  year,  is  a  lock  canal,  and  the  American  en 
gineers  were  thoroughly  familiar  with  it;  whereas,  in  my 
judgment,  the  European  engineers  had  failed  to  pay  proper 
heed  to  the  lessons  taught  by  its  operation  and  management. 
Moreover,  the  engineers  who  were  to  do  the  work  at  Pan- 


528    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT -AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

ama  all  favored  a  lock  canal.  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
a  sea-level  canal  would  be  slightly  less  exposed  to  damage 
in  the  event  of  war ;  that  the  running  expenses,  apart  from 
the  heavy  cost  of  interest  on  the  amount  necessary  to  build 
it,  would  be  less ;  and  that  for  small  ships  the  time  of  transit 
would  be  less.  But  I  also  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
lock  canal  at  the  proposed  level  would  cost  only  about  half 
as  much  to  build  and  would  be  built  in  half  the  time,  with 
much  less  risk;  that  for  large  ships  the  transit  would  be 
quicker,  and  that,  taking  into  account  the  interest  saved, 
the  cost  of  maintenance  would  be  less.  Accordingly  I  rec 
ommended  to  Congress,  on  February  19,  1906,  that  a  lock 
canal  should  be  built,  and  my  recommendation  was  adopted. 
Congress  insisted  upon  having  it  built  by  a  commission 
of  several  men.  I  tried  faithfully  to  get  good  work  out  of 
the  commission,  and  found  it  quite  impossible ;  for  a  many- 
headed  commission  is  an  extremely  poor  executive  instru 
ment.  At  last  I  put  Colonel  Goethals  in  as  head  of  the 
commission.  Then,  when  Congress  still  refused  to  make 
the  commission  single-headed,  I  solved  the  difficulty  by  an 
executive  order  of  January  6,  1908,  which  practically  ac 
complished  the  object  by  enlarging  the  powers  of  the  chair 
man,  making  all  the  other  members  of  the  commission 
dependent  upon  him,  and  thereby  placing  the  work  under 
one-man  control.  Dr.  Gorgas  had  already  performed  an 
inestimable  service  by  caring  for  the  sanitary  conditions 
so  thoroughly  as  to  make  the  Isthmus  as  safe  as  a  health 
resort.  Colonel  Goethals  proved  to  be  the  man  of  all 
others  to  do  the  job.  It  would  be  impossible  to  overstate 
wrhat  he  has  done.  It  is  the  greatest  task  of  any  kind  that 
any  man  in  the  world  has  accomplished  during  the  years 
that  Colonel  Goethals  has  been  at  work.  It  is  the  greatest 
task  of  its  own  kind  that  has  ever  been  performed  in  the 
world  at  all.  Colonel  Goethals  has  succeeded  in  instilling 
into  the  men  under  him  a  spirit  which  elsewhere  has  been 
found  only  in  a  few  victorious  armies.  It  is  proper  and 
appropriate  that,  like  the  soldiers  of  such  armies,  they 
should  receive  medals  which  are  allotted  each  man  who  has 


MONROE  DOCTRINE  AND  PANAMA  CANAL   529 

served  for  a  sufficient  length  of  time.  A  finer  body  of  men 
has  never  been  gathered  by  any  nation  than  the  men  who 
have  done  the  work  of  building  the  Panama  Canal;  the 
conditions  under  which  they  have  lived  and  have  done  their 
work  have  been  better  than  in  any  similar  work  ever  under 
taken  in  the  tropics;  they  have  all  felt  an  eager  pride  in 
their  work;  and  they  have  made  not  only  America  but  the 
whole  world  their  debtors  by  what  they  have  accomplished. 


APPENDIX 

COLOMBIA:   THE   PROPOSED   MESSAGE   TO   CONGRESS 

The  rough  draft  of  the  message  I  had  proposed  to  send  Congress 
ran  as  follows: 

"The  Colombian  Government,  through  its  representative  here, 
and  directly  in  communication  with  our  representative  at  Colom 
bia,  has  refused  to  come  to  any  agreement  with  us,  and  has  delayed 
action  so  as  to  make  it  evident  that  it  intends  to  make  extortionate 
and  improper  terms  with  us.  The  Isthmian  Canal  bill  was,  of 
course,  passed  upon  the  assumption  that  whatever  route  was  used, 
the  benefit  to  the  particular  section  of  the  Isthmus  through  which 
it  passed  would  be  so  great  that  the  country  controlling  this  part 
would  be  eager  to  facilitate  the  building  of  the  canal.  It  is  out  of 
the  question  to  submit  to  extortion  on  the  part  of  a  beneficiary  of 
the  scheme.  All  the  labor,  all  the  expense,  all  the  risk  are  to  be 
assumed  by  us  and  all  the  skill  shown  by  us.  Those  controlling 
the  ground  through  which  the  canal  is  to  be  put  are  wholly  inca 
pable  of  building  it. 

"Yet  the  interest  of  international  commerce  generally  and  the 
interest  of  this  country  generally  demands  that  the  canal  should 
be  begun  with  no  needless  delay.  The  refusal  of  Colombia  properly 
to  respond  to  our  sincere  and  earnest  efforts  to  come  to  an  agree 
ment,  or  to  pay  heed  to  the  many  concessions  we  have  made,  ren 
ders  it  in  my  judgment  necessary  that  the  United  States  should 
take  immediate  action  on  one  of  two  lines:  either  we  should  drop 
the  Panama  Canal  project  and  immediately  begin  work  on  the 
Nicaraguan  Canal,  or  else  we  should  purchase  all  the  rights  of  the 
French  company,  and,  without  any  further  parley  with  Colombia, 
enter  upon  the  completion  of  the  canal  which  the  French  company 
has  begun.  I  feel  that  the  latter  course  is  the  one  demanded  by 
the  interests  of  this  Nation,  and  I  therefore  bring  the  matter  to 
your  attention  for  such  action  in  the  premises  as  you  may  deem 
wise.  If  in  your  judgment  it  is  better  not  to  take  such  action,  then 
I  shall  proceed  at  once  with  the  Nicaraguan  Canal. 

"The  reason  that  I  advocate  the  action  above  outlined  in  re 
gard  to  the  Panama  Canal  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  strong  testi 
mony  of  the  experts  that  this  route  is  the  most  feasible ;  and  in  the 
next  place,  the  impropriety  from  an  international  standpoint  of 
permitting  such  conduct  as  that  to  which  Colombia  seems  to  in 
cline.  The  testimony  of  the  experts  is  very  strong,  not  only  that 
ithe  Panama  route  is  feasible,  but  that  in  the  Nicaragua  route  we 

530 


APPENDIX  531 

may  encounter  some  unpleasant  surprises,  and  that  it  is  far  more 
difficult  to  forecast  the  result  with  any  certainty  as  regards  this 
latter  route.  As  for  Colombia's  attitude,  it  is  incomprehensible 
upon  any  theory  of  desire  to  see  the  canal  built  upon  the  basis  of 
mutual  advantage  alike  to  those  building  it  and  to  Colombia  her 
self.  All  we  desire  to  do  is  to  take  up  the  work  begun  by  the 
French  Government  and  to  finish  it.  Obviously  it  is  Colombia's 
duty  to  help  towards  such  completion.  We  are  most  anxious  to 
come  to  an  agreement  with  her  in  which  most  scrupulous  care 
should  be  taken  to  guard  her  interests  and  ours.  But  we  cannot 
consent  to  permit  her  to  block  the  performance  of  the  work  which 
it  is  so  greatly  to  our  interest  immediately  to  begin  and  carry 
through." 

Shortly  after  this  rough  draft  was  dictated  the  Panama  revolu 
tion  came,  and  I  never  thought  of  the  rough  draft  again  until  I  was 
accused  of  having  instigated  the  revolution.  This  accusation  is 
preposterous  in  the  eyes  of  any  one  who  knows  the  actual  condi 
tions  at  Panama.  Only  the  menace  of  action  by  us  in  the  interest 
of  Colombia  kept  down  revolution;  as  soon  as  Colombia's  own 
conduct  removed  such  menace,  all  check  on  the  various  revolu 
tionary  movements  (there  were  at  least  three  from  entirely  separate 
sources)  ceased;  and  then  an  explosion  was  inevitable,  for  the 
French  company  knew  that  all  their  property  would  be  confiscated 
if  Colombia  put  through  her  plans,  and  the  entire  people  of  Pan 
ama  felt  that  if  in  disgust  with  Colombia's  extortions  the  United 
States  turned  to  Nicaragua,  they,  the  people  of  Panama,  would  be 
ruined.  Knowing  the  character  of  those  then  in  charge  of  the 
Colombian  Government,  I  was  not  surprised  at  their  bad  faith; 
but  I  was  surprised  at  their  folly.  They  apparently  had  no  idea 
either  of  the  power  of  France  or  the  power  of  the  United  States, 
and  expected,  to  be  permitted  to  commit  wrong  with  impunity, 
just  as  Castro  in  Venezuela  had  done.  The  difference  was  that, 
unless  we  acted  in  self-defense,  Colombia  had  it  in  her  power  to  do 
us  serious  harm,  and  Venezuela  did  not  have  such  power.  Colom 
bia's  wrongdoing,  therefore,  recoiled  on  her  own  head.  There 
was  no  new  lesson  taught ;  it  ought  already  to  have  been  known  to 
every  one  that  wickedness,  weakness,  and  folly  combined  rarely 
fail  to  meet  punishment,  and  that  the  intent  to  do  wrong,  when 
joined  to  inability  to  carry  the  evil  purpose  to  a  successful  conclu 
sion,  inevitably  reacts  on  the  wrongdoer. 

For  the  full  history  of  the  acquisition  and  building  of  the  canal 
see  "The  Panama  Gateway,"  by  Joseph  Bucklin  Bishop  (Scrib- 
ner's  Sons).  Mr.  Bishop  has  been  for  eight  years  secretary  of  the 
commission  and  is  one  of  the  most  efficient  of  the  many  efficient 
men  to  whose  work  on  the  Isthmus  America  owes  so  much. 


CHAPTER   XV 

THE  PEACE   OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS 

THERE  can  be  no  nobler  cause  for  which  to  work  than  the 
peace  of  righteousness ;  and  high  honor  is  due  those  serene 
and  lofty  souls  who  with  wisdom  and  courage,  with  high 
idealism  tempered  by  sane  facing  of  the  actual  facts  of 
life,  have  striven  to  bring  nearer  the  day  when  armed 
strife  between  nation  and  nation,  between  class  and  class, 
between  man  and  man  shall  end  throughout  the  world.  Be 
cause  all  this  is  true,  it  is  also  true  that  there  are  no  men 
more  ignoble  or  more  foolish,  no  men  whose  actions  are 
fraught  with  greater  possibility  of  mischief  to  their  coun 
try  and  to  mankind,  than  those  who  exalt  unrighteous  peace 
as  better  than  righteous  war.  The  men  who  have  stood 
highest  in  our  history,  as  in  the  history  of  all  countries, 
are  those  who  scorned  injustice,  who  were  incapable  of 
oppressing  the  weak,  or  of  permitting  their  country,  with 
their  consent,  to  oppress  the  weak,  but  who  did  not  hesitate 
to  draw  the  sword  when  to  leave  it  undrawn  meant  inability 
to  arrest  triumphant  wrong. 

All  this  is  so  obvious  that  it  ought  not  to  be  'necessary  to 
repeat  it.  Yet  every  man  in  active  affairs,  who  also  reads 
about  the  past,  grows  by  bitter  experience  to  realize  that 
there  are  plenty  of  men,  not  only  among  those  who  mean 
ill,  but  among  those  who  mean  well,  who  are  ready  enough 
to  praise  what  was  done  in  the  past,  and  yet  are  incapable 
of  profiting  by  it  when  faced  by  the  needs  of  the  present. 
During  our  generation  this  seems  to  have  been  peculiarly 
the  case  among  the  men  who  have  become  obsessed  with 
the  idea  of  obtaining  universal  peace  by  some  cheap  patent 
panacea. 

There  has  been  a  real  and  substantial  growth  in  the  feel- 

532 


THE   PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  533 

ing  for  international  responsibility  and  justice  among  the 
great  civilized  nations  during  the  past  threescore  or  four 
score  years.  There  has  been  a  real  growth  of  recognition 
of  the  fact  that  moral  turpitude  is  involved  in  the  wronging 
of  one  nation  by  another,  and  that  in  most  cases  war  is  an 
evil  method  of  settling  international  difficulties.  But  as 
yet  there  has  been  only  a  rudimentary  beginning  of  the 
development  of  international  tribunals  of  justice,  and  there 
has  been  no  development  at  all  of  any  international  police 
power.  Now,  as  I  have  already  said,  the  whole  fabric  of 
municipal  law,  of  law  within  each  nation,  rests  ultimately 
upon  the  judge  and  the  policeman;  and  the  complete  ab 
sence  of  the  policeman,  and  the  almost  complete  absence  of 
the  judge,  in  international  affairs,  prevents  there  being  as 
yet  any  real  homology  between  municipal  and  international 
law. 

Moreover,  the  questions  which  sometimes  involve  nations 
in  war  are  far  more  difficult  and  complex  than  any  ques 
tions  that  affect  merely  individuals.  Almost  every  great 
nation  has  inherited  certain  questions,  either  with  other  na 
tions  or  with  sections  of  its  own  people,  which  it  is  quite 
impossible,  in  the  present  state  of  civilization,  to  decide  as 
matters  between  private  individuals  can  be  decided.  Dur 
ing  the  last  century  at  least  half  of  the  wars  that  have  been 
fought  have  been  civil  and  not  foreign  wars.  There  are 
big  and  powerful  nations  which  habitually  commit,  either 
upon  other  nations  or  upon  sections  of  their  own  people, 
wrongs  so  outrageous  as  to  justify  even  the  most  peaceful 
persons  in  going  to  war.  There  are  also  weak  nations  so 
utterly  incompetent  either  to  protect  the  rights  of  foreign 
ers  against  their  own  citizens,  or  to  protect  their  own  citi 
zens  against  foreigners,  that  it  becomes  a  matter  of  sheer 
duty  for  some  outside  power  to  interfere  in  connection  with 
them.  As  yet  in  neither  case  is  there  any  efficient  method  of 
getting  international  action;  and  if  joint  action  by  several 
powers  is  secured,  the  result  is  usually  considerably  worse 
than  if  only  one  Power  interfered.  The  worst  infamies  of 
modern  times — such  affairs  as  the  massacres  of  the  Ar- 


534    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

menians  by  the  Turks,  for  instance — have  been  perpetrated 
in  a  time  of  nominally  profound  international  peace,  when 
there  has  been  a  concert  of  big  Powers  to  prevent  the 
breaking  of  this  peace,  although  only  by  breaking  it  could 
the  outrages  be  stopped.  Be  it  remembered  that  the  peo 
ples  who  suffered  by  these  hideous  massacres,  who  saw 
their  women  violated  and  their  children  tortured,  were 
actually  enjoying  all  the  benefits  of  "disarmament." 
Otherwise  they  would  not  have  been  massacred ;  for  if  the 
Jews  in  Russia  and  the  Armenians  in  Turkey  had  been 
armed,  and  had  been  efficient  in  the  use  of  their  arms,  no 
mob  would  have  meddled  with  them. 

Yet  amiable  but  fatuous  persons,  with  all  these  facts 
before  their  eyes,  pass  resolutions  demanding  universal 
arbitration  for  everything,  and  the  disarmament  of  the  free 
civilized  powers  and  their  abandonment  of  their  armed 
forces ;  or  else  they  write  well-meaning,  solemn  little  books, 
or  pamphlets  or  editorials,  and  articles  in  magazines  or 
newspapers,  to  show  that  it  is  "an  illusion"  to  believe  that 
war  ever  pays,  because  it  is  expensive.  This  is  precisely 
like  arguing  that  we  should  disband  the  police  and  devote 
our  sole  attention  to  persuading  criminals  that  it  is  "an 
illusion"  to  suppose  that  burglary,  highway  robbery  and 
white  slavery  are  profitable.  It  is  almost  useless  to  at 
tempt  to  argue  with  these  well-intentioned  persons,  because 
they  are  suffering  under  an  obsession  and  are  not  open  to 
reason.  They  go  wrong  at  the  outset,  for  they  lay  all  the 
emphasis  on  peace  and  none  at  all  on  righteousness.  They 
are  not  all  of  them  physically  timid  men;  but  they  are 
usually  men  of  soft  life;  and  they  rarely  possess  a  high 
sense  of  honor  or  a  keen  patriotism.  They  rarely  try  to 
prevent  their  fellow  countrymen  from  insulting  or  wrong 
ing  the  people  of  other  nations;  but  they  always  ardently 
advocate  that  we,  in  our  turn,  shall  tamely  submit  to  wrong 
and  insult  from  other  nations.  As  Americans  their  folly 
is  peculiarly  scandalous,  because  if  the  principles  they  now 
uphold  are  right,  it  means  that  it  would  have  been  better 
that  Americans  should  never  have  achieved  their  inde- 


THE    PEACE    OP   RIGHTEOUSNESS  535 

pendence,  and  better  that,  in  1861,  they  should  have  peace 
fully  submitted  to  seeing  their  country  split  into  half  a 
dozen  jangling  confederates  and  slavery  made  perpetual. 
If  unwilling  to  learn  from  their  own  history,  let  those  who 
think  that  it  is  an  "  illusion "  to  believe  that  a  war  ever 
benefits  a  nation  look  at  the  difference  between  China  and 
Japan.  China  has  neither  a  fleet  nor  an  efficient  army. 
It  is  a  huge  civilized  empire,  one  of  the  most  populous  on 
the  globe;  and  it  has  been  the  helpless  prey  of  outsiders 
because  it  does  not  possess  the  power  to  fight.  Japan 
stands  on  a  footing  of  equality  with  European  and  Ameri 
can  nations  because  it  does  possess  this  power.  China  now 
sees  Japan,  Eussia,  Germany,  England  and  France  in  pos 
session  of  fragments  of  her  empire,  and  has  twice  within 
the  lifetime  of  the  present  generation  seen  her  capital  in 
the  hands  of  allied  invaders,  because  she  in  very  fact  real 
izes  the  ideals  of  the  persons  who  wish  the  United  States 
to  disarm,  and  then  trust  that  our  helplessness  will  secure 
us  a  contemptuous  immunity  from  attack  by  outside 
nations. 

The  chief  trouble  comes  from  the  entire  inability  of  these 
worthy  people  to  understand  that  they  are  demanding 
things  that  are  mutually  incompatible  when  they  demand 
peace  at  any  price,  and  also  justice  and  righteousness.  I 
remember  one  representative  of  their  number,  who  used  to 
write  little  sonnets  on  behalf  of  the  Mahdi  and  the  Sudan 
ese,  these  sonnets  setting  forth  the  need  that  the  Sudan 
should  be  both  independent  and  peaceful.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  Sudan  valued  independence  only  because  it  desired 
to  war  against  all  Christians  and  to  carry  on  an  unlimited 
slave  trade.  It  was  "  independent "  under  the  Mahdi  for 
a  dozen  years,  and  during  those  dozen  years  the  bigotry, 
tyranny,  and  cruel  religious  intolerance  were  such  as  flour 
ished  in  the  seventh  century,  and  in  spite  of  systematic 
slave  raids  the  population  decreased  by  nearly  two-thirds, 
and  practically  all  the  children  died.  Peace  came,  well- 
being  came,  freedom  from  rape  and  murder  and  torture  and 
highway  robbery,  and  every  brutal  gratification  of  lust  and 


536    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

greed  came,  only  when  the  Sudan  lost  its  independence  and 
passed  under  English  rule.  Yet  this  well-meaning  little 
sonneteer  sincerely  felt  that  his  verses  were  issued  in  the 
cause  of  humanity.  Looking  back  from  the  vantage  point 
of  a  score  of  years,  probably  every  one  will  agree  that  he 
was  an  absurd  person.  But  he  was  not  one  whit  more 
absurd  than  most  of  the»more  prominent  persons  who  advo 
cate  disarmament  by  the  United  States,  the  cessation  of 
up-building  the  navy,  and  the  promise  to  agree  to  arbitrate 
all  matters,  including  those  affecting  our  national  interests 
and  honor,  with  all  foreign  nations. 

These  persons  would  do  no  harm  if  they  affected  only 
themselves.  Many  of  them  are,  in  the  ordinary  relations 
of  life,  good  citizens.  They  are  exactly  like  the  other  good 
citizens  who  believe  that  enforced  universal  vegetarianism 
or  anti-vaccination  is  the  panacea  for  all  ills.  But  in  their 
particular  case  they  are  able  to  do  harm  because  they 
affect  our  relations  with  foreign  powers,  so  that  other  men 
pay  the  debt  which  they  themselves  have  really  incurred. 
It  is  the  foolish,  peace-at-any-price  persons  who  try  to 
persuade  our  people  to  make  unwise  and  improper  treaties, 
or  to  stop  building  up  the  navy.  But  if  trouble  comes  and 
the  treaties  are  repudiated,  or  there  is  a  demand  for  armed 
intervention,  it  is  not  these  people  who  will  pay  anything; 
they  will  stay  at  home  in  safety,  and  leave  brave  men  to 
pay  in  blood,  and  honest  men  to  pay  in  shame,  for  their 
folly. 

The  trouble  is  that  our  policy  is  apt  to  go  in  zigzags, 
because  different  sections  of  our  people  exercise  at  different 
times  unequal  pressure  on  our  government.  One  class  of 
our  citizens  clamor  for  treaties  impossible  of  fulfilment, 
and  improper  to  fulfil;  another  class  have  no  objection  to 
the  passage  of  these  treaties  so  long  as  there  is  no  concrete 
case  to  which  they  apply,  but  instantly  oppose  a  veto  on 
their  application  when  any  concrete  case  does  actually  arise. 
One  of  our  cardinal  doctrines  is  freedom  of  speech,  which 
means  freedom  of  speech  about  foreigners  as  well  as  about 
ourselves ;  and,  inasmuch  as  we  exercise  this  right  with,  com- 


THE   PEACE    OP   KIGHTEOUSNESS  537 

plete  absence  of  restraint,  we  cannot  expect  other  nations 
to  hold  us  harmless  unless  in  the  last  resort  we  are  able  to 
make  our  own  words  good  by  our  deeds.  One  class  of  our 
citizens  indulges  in  gushing  promises  to  do  everything  for 
foreigners,  another  class  offensively  and  improperly  reviles 
them;  and  it  is  hard  to  say  which  class  more  thoroughly 
misrepresents  the  sober,  self-respecting  judgment  of  the 
American  people  as  a  whole.  The  only  safe  rule  is  to  prom 
ise  little,  and  faithfully  to  keep  every  promise;  to  " speak 
softly  and  carry  a  big  stick." 

A  prime  need  for  our  nation,  as  of  course  for  every  other 
nation,  is  to  make  up  its  mind  definitely  what  it  wishes, 
and  not  to  try  to  pursue  paths  of  conduct  incompatible  one 
with  the  other.  If  this  nation  is  content  to  be  the  China  of 
the  New  World,  then  and  then  only  can  it  afford  to  do  away 
with  the  navy  and  the  army.  If  it  is  content  to  abandon 
Hawaii  and  the  Panama  Canal,  to  cease  to  talk  of  the 
Monroe  Doctrine,  and  to  admit  the  right  of  any  European 
or  Asiatic  power  to  dictate  what  immigrants  shall  be  sent 
to  and  received  in  America,  and  whether  or  not  they  shall 
be  allowed  to  become  citizens  and  hold  land — why,  of 
course,  if  America  is  content  to  have  nothing  to  say  on 
any  of  these  matters  and  to  keep  silent  in  the  presence  of 
armed  outsiders,  then  it  can  abandon  its  navy  and  agree  to 
arbitrate  all  questions  of  all  kinds  with  every  foreign 
power.  In  such  event  it  can  afford  to  pass  its  spare  time 
in  one  continuous  round  of  universal  peace  celebrations, 
and  of  smug  self-satisfaction  in  having  earned  the  derision 
of  all  the  virile  peoples  of  mankind.  Those  who  advocate 
such  a  policy  do  not  occupy  a  lofty  position.  But  at  least 
their  position  is  understandable. 

It  is  entirely  inexcusable,  however,  to  try  to  combine  the 
unready  hand  with  the  unbridled  tongue.  It  is  folly  to 
permit  freedom  of  speech  about  foreigners  as  well  as  our 
selves — and  the  peace-at-any-price  persons  are  much  too 
feeble  a  folk  to  try  to  interfere  with  freedom  of  speech — 
and  yet  to  try  to  shirk  the  consequences  of  freedom  of 
speech.  It  is  folly  to  try  to  abolish  our  navy,  and  at  the 


538    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

same  time  to  insist  that  we  have  a  right  to  enforce  the 
Monroe  Doctrine,  that  we  have  a  right  to  control  the 
Panama  Canal  which  we  ourselves  dug,  that  we  have  a  right 
to  retain  Hawaii  and  prevent  foreign  nations  from  taking 
Cuba,  and  a  right  to  determine  what  immigrants,  Asiatic 
or  European,  shall  come  to  our  shores,  and  the  terms  on 
which  they  shall  be  naturalized  and  shall  hold  land  and 
exercise  other  privileges.  We  are  a  rich  people,  and  an 
unmilitary  people.  In  international  affairs  we  are  a  short 
sighted  people.  But  I  know  my  countrymen.  Down  at 
bottom  their  temper  is  such  that  they  will  not  permanently 
tolerate  injustice  done  to  them.  In  the  long  run  they  will 
no  more  permit  affronts  to  their  National  honor  than  in 
juries  to  their  national  interest.  Such  being  the  case,  they 
will  do  well  to  remember  that  the  surest  of  all  ways  to 
invite  disaster  is  to  be  opulent,  aggressive  and  unarmed. 

Throughout  the  seven  and  a  half  years  that  I  was  Presi 
dent,  I  pursued  without  faltering  one  consistent  foreign 
policy,  a  policy  of  genuine  international  good  will  and  of 
consideration  for  the  rights  of  others,  and  at  the  same  time 
of  steady  preparedness.  The  weakest  nations  knew  that 
they,  no  less  than  the  strongest,  were  safe  from  insult  and 
injury  at  our  hands ;  and  the  strong  and  the  weak  alike  also 
knew  that  we  possessed  both  the  will  and  the  ability  to 
guard  ourselves  from  wrong  or  insult  at  the  hands  of 
any  one. 

It  was  under  my  administration  that  the  Hague  Court 
was  saved  from  becoming  an  empty  farce.  It  had  been 
established  by  joint  international  agreement,  but  no  Power 
had  been  willing  to  resort  to  it.  Those  establishing  it  had 
grown  to  realize  that  it  was  in  danger  of  becoming  a  mere 
paper  court,  so  that  it  would  never  really  come  into  being 
at  all.  M.  d'Estournelles  de  Constant  had  been  especially 
alive  to  this  danger.  By  correspondence  and  in  personal 
interviews  he  impressed  upon  me  the  need  not  only  of 
making  advances  by  actually  applying  arbitration — not 
merely  promising  by  treaty  to  apply  it — to  questions  that 
were  up  for  settlement,  but  of  using  the  Hague  tribunal 


THE   PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  539 

for  this  purpose.  I  cordially  sympathized  with  these  views. 
On  the  recommendation  of  John  Hay,  I  succeeded  in  getting 
an  agreement  with  Mexico  to  lay  a  matter  in  dispute  be 
tween  the  two  republics  before  the  Hague  Court.  This 
was  the  first  case  ever  brought  before  the  Hague  Court.  It 
was  followed  by  numerous  others;  and  it  definitely  estab 
lished  that  court  as  the  great  international  peace  tribunal. 
By  mutual  agreement  with  Great  Britain,  through  the  deci 
sion  of  a  joint  commission,  of  which  the  American  members 
were  Senators  Lodge  and  Turner,  and  Secretary  Boot,  we 
were  able  peacefully  to  settle  the  Alaska  Boundary  ques 
tion,  the  only  question  remaining  between  ourselves  and 
the  British  Empire  wrhich  it  was  not  possible  to  settle  by 
friendly  arbitration;  this  therefore  represented  the  re 
moval  of  the  last  obstacle  to  absolute  agreement  between 
the  two  peoples.  We  were  of  substantial  service  in  bring 
ing  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion  the  negotiations  at  Alge- 
ciras  concerning  Morocco.  "We  concluded  with  Great 
Britain,  and  with  most  of  the  other  great  nations,  arbitra 
tion  treaties  specifically  agreeing  to  arbitrate  all  matters, 
and  especially  the  interpretation  of  treaties,  save  only  as 
regards  questions  affecting  territorial  integrity,  national 
honor  and  vital  national  interest.  We  made  with  Great 
Britain  a  treaty  guaranteeing  the  free  use  of  the  Panama 
Canal  on  equal  terms  to  the  ships  of  all  nations,  while 
reserving  to  ourselves  the  right  to  police  and  fortify  the 
canal,  and  therefore  to  control  it  in  time  of  war.  Under 
this  treaty  we  are  in  honor  bound  to  arbitrate  the  question 
of  canal  tolls  for  coastwise  traffic  between  the  Western  and 
Eastern  coasts  of  the  United  States.  I  believe  that  the 
American  position  as  regards  this  matter  is  right;  but  I 
also  believe  that  under  the  arbitration  treaty  we  are  in 
honor  bound  to  submit  the  matter  to  arbitration  in  view 
of  Great  Britain's  contention — although  I  hold  it  to  be  an 
unwise  contention — that  our  position  is  unsound.  I  em 
phatically  disbelieve  in  making  universal  arbitration  trea 
ties  which  neither  the  makers  nor  any  one  else  would  for  a 
moment  dream  of  keeping.  I  no  less  emphatically  insist 


540    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

that  it  is  our  duty  to  keep  the  limited  and  sensible  arbitra 
tion  treaties  which  we  have  already  made.  The  importance 
of  a  promise  lies  not  in  making  it,  but  in  keeping  it ;  and  the 
poorest  of  all  positions  for  a  nation  to  occupy  in  such  a 
matter  is  readiness  to  make  impossible  promises  at  the 
same  time  that  there  is  failure  to  keep  promises  which  have 
been  made,  which  can  be  kept,  and  which  it  is  discreditable 
to  break. 

During  the  early  part  of  the  year  1905,  the  strain  on  the 
civilized  world  caused  by  the  Eusso-Japanese  War  became 
serious.  The  losses  of  life  and  of  treasure  were  frightful. 
From  all  the  sources  of  information  at  hand,  I  grew  most 
strongly  to  believe  that  a  further  continuation  of  the  strug 
gle  would  be  a  very  bad  thing  for  Japan,  and  an  even  worse 
thing  for  Eussia.  Japan  was  already  suffering  terribly 
from  the  drain  upon  her  men,  and  especially  upon  her 
resources,  and  had  nothing  further  to  gain  from  contin 
uance  of  the  struggle;  its  continuance  meant  to  her  more 
loss  than  gain,  even  if  she  were  victorious.  Eussia,  in  spite 
of  her  gigantic  strength,  was,  in  my  judgment,  apt  to  lose 
even  more  than  she  had  already  lost  if  the  struggle  contin 
ued.  I  deemed  it  probable  that  she  would  no  more  be  able 
successfully  to  defend  Eastern  Siberia  and  Northern  Man 
churia  than  she  had  been  able  to  defend  Southern  Man 
churia  and  Korea.  If  the  war  went  on,  I  thought  it,  on 
the  whole,  likely  that  Eussia  would  be  driven  west  of  Lake 
Baikal.  But  it  was  very  far  from  certain.  There  is  no 
certainty  in  such  a  war.  Japan  might  have  met  defeat, 
and  defeat  to  her  would  have  spelt  overwhelming  disaster ; 
and  even  if  she  had  continued  to  win,  what  she  thus  won 
wrould  have  been  of  no  value  to  her,  and  the  cost  in  blood 
and  money  would  have  left  her  drained  white.  I  believed, 
therefore,  that  the  time  had  come  when  it  was  greatly  to 
the  interest  of  both  combatants  to  have  peace,  and  when 
therefore  it  was  possible  to  get  both  to  agree  to  peace. 

I  first  satisfied  myself  that  each  side  wished  me  to  act, 
but  that,  naturally  and  properly,  each  side  was  exceedingly 
anxious  that  the  other  should  not  believe  that  the  action  was 


Copyright  by  Underwood  &  Underwood. 

PF.ACF.  COMMISSION  AT  PORTSMOUTH. 


THE   PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  541 

taken  on  its  initiative.  I  then  sent  an  identical  note  to  the 
two  powers,  proposing  that  they  should  meet,  through  their 
representatives,  to  see  if  peace  could  not  be  made  directly 
between  them,  and  offered  to  act  as  an  intermediary  in 
bringing  about  such  a  meeting,  but  not  for  any  other  pur 
pose.  Each  assented  to  my  proposal  in  principle.  There 
was  difficulty  in  getting  them  to  agree  on  a  common  meeting 
place;  but  each  finally  abandoned  its  original  contention 
in  the  matter,  and  the  representatives  of  the  two  nations 
finally  met  at  Portsmouth,  in  New  Hampshire.  I  pre 
viously  received  the  two  delegations  at  Oyster  Bay  on  the 
U.  S.  S.  Mayflower,  which,  together  with  another  naval 
vessel,  I  put  at  their  disposal,  on  behalf  of  the  United 
States  Government,  to  take  them  from  Oyster  Bay  to 
Portsmouth. 

As  is  customary — but  both  unwise  and  undesirable — 
in  such  cases,  each  side  advanced  claims  which  the  other 
could  not  grant.  The  chief  difficulty  came  because  of 
Japan's  demand  for  a  money  indemnity.  I  felt  that  it 
would  be  better  for  Eussia  to  pay  some  indemnity  than  to 
go  on  with  the  war,  for  there  was  little  chance,  in  my  judg 
ment,  of  the  war  turning  out  favorably  for  Russia,  and  the 
revolutionary  movement  already  under  way  bade  fair  to 
overthrow  the  negotiations  entirely.  I  advised  the  Rus 
sian  Government  to  this  effect,  at  the  same  time  urging 
them  to  abandon  their  pretensions  on  certain  other  points, 
notably  concerning  the  southern  half  of  Saghalien,  which 
the  Japanese  had  taken.  I  also,  however,  and  equally 
strongly,  advised  the  Japanese  that  in  my  judgment  it 
would  be  the  gravest  mistake  on  their  part  to  insist  on 
continuing  the  war  for  the  sake  of  a  money  indemnity;  for 
Eussia  was  absolutely  firm  in  refusing  to  give  them  an  in 
demnity,  and  the  longer  the  war  continued  the  less  able 
she  would  be  to  pay.  I  pointed  out  that  there  was  no  pos 
sible  analogy  between  their  case  and  that  of  Germany  in 
the  war  with  France,  which  they  were  fond  of  quoting. 
The  Germans  held  Paris  and  half  of  France,  and  gave  up 
much  territory  in  lieu  of  the  indemnity,  whereas  the  Japa- 


542    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

nese  were  still  many  thousand  miles  from  Moscow,  and  had 
no  territory  whatever  which  they  wished  to  give  up.  I  also 
pointed  out  that  in  my  judgment  whereas  the  Japanese 
had  enjoyed  the  sympathy  of  most  of  the  civilized  powers 
at  the  outset  of  and  during  the  continuance  of  the  war,  they 
would  forfeit  it  if  they  turned  the  war  into  one  merely  for 
getting  money — and,  moreover,  they  would  almost  certainly 
fail  to  get  the  money,  and  would  simply  find  themselves 
at  the  end  of  a  year,  even  if  things  prospered  with  them, 
in  possession  of  territory  they  did  not  want,  having  spent 
enormous  additional  sums  of  money,  and  lost  enormous 
additional  numbers  of  men,  and  yet  without  a  penny  of 
remuneration.  The  treaty  of  peace  was  finally  signed. 

As  is  inevitable  under  such  circumstances,  each  side  felt 
that  it  ought  to  have  got  better  terms ;  and  when  the  danger 
was  well  past  each  side  felt  that  it  had  been  over-reached 
by  the  other,  and  that  if  the  war  had  gone  on  it  would  have 
gotten  more  than  it  actually  did  get.  The  Japanese  Gov 
ernment  had  been  wise  throughout,  except  in  the  matter  of 
announcing  that  it  would  insist  on  a  money  indemnity. 
Neither  in  national  nor  in  private  affairs  it  is  ordinarily 
advisable  to  make  a  bluff  which  cannot  be  put  through — 
personally,  I  never  believe  in  doing  it  under  any  circum 
stances.  The  Japanese  people  had  been  misled  by  this 
bluff  of  their  Government;  and  the  unwisdom  of  the  Gov 
ernment  's  action  in  the  matter  was  shown  by  the  great 
resentment  the  treaty  aroused  in  'Japan,  although  it  was  so 
beneficial  to  Japan.  There  were  various  mob  outbreaks, 
especially  in  the  Japanese  cities;  the  police  were  roughly 
handled,  and  several  Christian  churches  were  burned,  as 
reported  to  me  by  the  American  Minister.  In  both  Kussia 
and  Japan  I  believe  that  the  net  result  as  regards  myself 
was  a  feeling  of  injury,  and  of  dislike  of  me,  among  the 
people  at  large.  I  had  expected  this ;  I  regarded  it  as  en 
tirely  natural;  and  I  did  not  resent  it  in  the  least.  The 
Governments  of  both  nations  behaved  toward  me  not  only 
with  correct  and  entire  propriety,  but  with  much  courtesy 
and  the  fullest  acknowledgment  of  the  good  effect  of  what 


THE   PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  543 

I  had  done ;  and  in  Japan,  at  least,  I  believe  that  the  leading 
men  sincerely  felt  that  I  had  been  their  friend.  I  had  cer 
tainly  tried  my  best  to  be  the  friend  not  only  of  the  Japa 
nese  people  but  of  the  Russian  people,  and  I  believe  that 
what  I  did  was  for  the  best  interests  of  both  and  of  the 
world  at  large. 

During  the  course  of  the  negotiations  I  tried  to  enlist  the 
aid  of  the  Governments  of  one  nation  which  was  friendly  to 
Eussia,  and  of  another  nation  which  was  friendly  to  Japan, 
in  helping  bring  about  peace.  I  got  no  aid  from  either.  I 
did,  however,  receive  aid  from  the  Emperor  of  Germany. 
His  ambassador  at  St.  Petersburg  was  the  one  Ambassador 
who  helped  the  American  Ambassador,  Mr.  Meyer,  at  del 
icate  and  doubtful  points  of  the  negotiations.  Mr.  Meyer, 
who  was,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  White,  the  most  useful 
diplomat  in  the  American  service,  rendered  literally  inval 
uable  aid  by  insisting  upon  himself  seeing  the  Czar  at 
critical  periods  of  the  transaction,  when  it  was  no  longer 
possible  for  me  to  act  successfully  through  the  representa 
tives  of  the  Czar,  who  were  often  at  cross  purposes  with 
one  another. 

As  a  result  of  the  Portsmouth  peace,  I  was  given  the 
Nobel  Peace  Prize.  This  consisted  of  a  medal,  which  I 
kept,  and  a  sum  of  $40,000,  which  I  turned  over  as  a  foun 
dation  of  industrial  peace  to  a  board  of  trustees  which  in 
cluded  Oscar  Straus,  Seth  Low  and  John  Mitchell.  In  the 
present  state  of  the  world's  development  industrial  peace 
is  even  more  essential  than  international  peace;  and  it  was 
fitting  and  appropriate  to  devote  the  peace  prize  to  such  a 
purpose.  In  1910,  while  in  Europe,  one  of  my  most  pleas 
ant  experiences  was  my  visit  to  Norway,  where  I  addressed 
the  Nobel  Committee,  and  set  forth  in  full  the  principles 
upon  which  I  had  acted,  not  only  in  this  particular  case  but 
throughout  my  administration. 

I  received  another  gift  which  I  deeply  appreciated,  an 
original  copy  of  Sully 's  "Memoires"  of  "Henry  le  Grand," 
sent  me  with  the  following  inscription  (I  translate  it 
roughly) : 


544    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

"PAKIS,  January,  1906. 

"The  undersigned  members  of  the  French  Parliamentary 
Group  of  International  Arbitration  and  Conciliation  have 
decided  to  tender  President  Koosevelt  a  token  of  their 
high  esteem  and  their  sympathetic  recognition  of  the  per 
sistent  and  decisive  initiative  he  has  taken  towards  gradu 
ally  substituting  friendly  and  judicial  for  violent  methods 
in  case  of  conflict  between  Nations. 

"They  believe  that  the  action  of  President  Boosevelt, 
which  has  realized  the  most  generous  hopes  to  be  found  in 
history,  should  be  classed  as  a  continuance  of  similar  illus 
trious  attempts  of  former  times,  notably  the  project  for 
international  concord  known  under  the  name  of  the  'Great 
Design  of  Henry  IV  in  the  memoirs  of  his  Prime  Minister, 
the  Duke  de  Sully.  In  consequence  they  have  sought  out 
a  copy  of  the  first  edition  of  these  memoirs,  and  they  take 
pleasure  in  offering  it  to  him,  with  the  request  that  he  will 
keep  it  among  his  family  papers." 

The  signatures  include  those  of  Emile  Loubet,  A.  Carnot, 
d'Estournelles  de  Constant,  Aristide  Briand,  Sully  Prud- 
homme,  Jean  Jaures,  A.  Fallieres,  E.  Poincare,  and  two  or 
three  hundred  others. 

Of  course  what  I  had  done  in  connection  with  the  Ports 
mouth  peace  was  misunderstood  by  some  good  and  sincere 
people.  Just  as  after  the  settlement  of  the  coal  strike,  there 
were  persons  who  thereupon  thought  that  it  was  in  my 
power,  and  was  my  duty,  to  settle  all  other  strikes,  so  after 
the  peace  of  Portsmouth  there  were  other  persons  —  not 
only  Americans,  by  the  way,  —  who  thought  it  my  duty 
forthwith  to  make  myself  a  kind  of  international  Med 
dlesome  Mattie  and  interfere  for  peace  and  justice  promis 
cuously  over  the  world.  Others,  with  a  delightful  non- 
sequitur,  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  inasmuch  as  I  had 
helped  to  bring  about  a  beneficent  and  necessary  peace 
I  must  of  necessity  have  changed  my  mind  about  war  being 
ever  necessary.  A  couple  of  days  after  peace  was  con- 


THE    PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  545 

eluded  I  wrote  to  a  friend:  " Don't  you  be  misled  by  the 
fact  that  just  at  the  moment  men  are  speaking  well  of  me. 
They  wrill  speak  ill  soon  enough.  As  Loeb  remarked  to 
me  to-day,  some  time  soon  I  shall  have  to  spank  some  little 
international  brigand,  and  then  all  the  well-meaning  idiots 
will  turn  and  shriek  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  what  I 
did  at  the  Peace  Conference,  whereas  in  reality  it  will  be 
exactly  in  line  with  it." 

To  one  of  my  political  opponents,  Mr.  Schurz,  who  wrote 
me  congratulating  me  upon  the  outcome  at  Portsmouth, 
and  suggesting  that  the  time  was  opportune  for  a  move 
towards  disarmament,  I  answered  in  a  letter  setting  forth 
views  which  I  thought  sound  then,  and  think  sound  now. 
The  letter  ran  as  follows : 

OYSTER  BAY,  N.  Y., 
September  8,  1905. 

My  dear  Mr.  Schurz:  I  thank  you  for  your  congratu 
lations.  As  to  what  you  say  about  disarmament — which 
I  suppose  is  the  rough  equivalent  of  "the  gradual  diminu 
tion  of  the  oppressive  burdens  imposed  upon  the  world  by 
armed  peace" — I  am  not  clear  either  as  to  what  can  be 
done  or  what  ought  to  be  done.  If  I  had  been  known  as 
one  of  the  conventional  type  of  peace  advocates  I  could  have 
done  nothing  whatever  in  bringing  about  peace  now,  I 
would  be  powerless  in  the  future  to  accomplish  anything, 
and  I  would  not  have  been  able  to  help  confer  the  boons 
upon  Cuba,  the  Philippines,  Porto  Kico  and  Panama, 
brought  about  by  our  action  therein.  If  the  Japanese  had 
not  armed  during  the  last  twenty  years,  this  would  indeed 
be  a  sorrowful  century  for  Japan.  If  this  country  had  not 
fought  the  Spanish  "War ;  if  we  had  failed  to  take  the  action 
we  did  about  Panama;  all  mankind  would  have  been  the 
loser.  While  the  Turks  were  butchering  the  Armenians 
the  European  powders  kept  the  peace  and  thereby  added  a 
burden  of  infamy  to  the  Nineteenth  Century,  for  in  keeping 
that  peace  a  greater  number  of  lives  were  lost  than  in  any 
European  war  since  the  days  of  Napoleon,  and  these  lives 


546    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

were  those  of  women  and  children  as  well  as  of  men ;  while 
the  moral  degradation,  the  brutality  inflicted  and  endured, 
the  aggregate  of  hideous  wrong  done,  surpassed  that  of  any 
war  of  which  we  have  record  in  modern  times.  Until  people 
get  it  firmly  fixed  in  their  minds  that  peace  is  valuable 
chiefly  as  a  means  to  righteousness,  and  that  it  can  only  be 
considered  as  an  end  when  it  also  coincides  with  righteous 
ness,  we  can  do  only  a  limited  amount  to  advance  its  coming 
on  this  earth.  There  is  of  course  no  analogy  at  present 
between  international  law  and  private  or  municipal  law, 
because  there  is  no  sanction  of  force  for  the  former,  while 
there  is  for  the  latter.  Inside  our  own  nation  the  law- 
abiding  man  does  not  have  to  arm  himself  against  the  law 
less  simply  because  there  is  some  armed  force — the  police, 
the  sheriff's  posse,  the  national  guard,  the  regulars — which 
can  be  called  out  to  enforce  the  laws.  At  present  there  is 
no  similar  international  force  to  call  on,  and  I  do  not  as  yet 
see  how  it  could  at  present  be  created.  Hitherto  peace  has 
often  come  only  because  some  strong  and  on  the  whole  just 
power  has  by  armed  force,  or  the  threat  of  armed  force, 
put  a  stop  to  disorder.  In  a  very  interesting  French  book 
the  other  day  I  was  reading  how  the  Mediterranean  was 
freed  from  pirates  only  by  the  "pax  Britannica,"  estab 
lished  by  England's  naval  force.  The  hopeless  and  hideous 
bloodshed  and  wickedness  of  Algiers  and  Turkestan  was 
stopped,  and  could  only  be  stopped,  when  civilized  nations 
in  the  shape  of  Eussia  and  France  took  possession  of  them. 
The  same  was  true  of  Burma  and  the  Malay  States,  as  well 
as  Egypt,  with  regard  to  England.  Peace  has  come  only 
as  the  sequel  to  the  armed  interference  of  a  civilized  power 
which,  relatively  to  its  opponent,  was  a  just  and  beneficent 
power.  If  England  had  disarmed  to  the  point  of  being 
unable  to  conquer  the  Sudan  and  protect  Egypt,  so  that  the 
Mahdists  had  established  their  supremacy  in  northeastern 
Africa,  the  result  would  have  been  a  horrible  and  bloody 
calamity  to  mankind.  It  was  only  the  growth  of  the  Euro 
pean  powers  in  military  efficiency  that  freed  eastern  Europe 
from  the  dreadful  scourge  of  the  Tartar  and  partially 


THE   PEACE    OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS  547 

freed  it  from  the  dreadful  scourge  of  the  Turk.  Unjust 
war  is  dreadful ;  a  just  war  may  be  the  highest  duty.  To 
have  the  best  nations,  the  free  and  civilized  nations,  disarm 
and  leave  the  despotisms  and  barbarisms  with  great  mili 
tary  force,  would  be  a  calamity  compared  to  which  the  ca 
lamities  caused  by  all  the  wars  of  the  nineteenth  century 
would  be  trivial.  Yet  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  we  can 
by  international  agreement  state  exactly  which  power 
ceases  to  be  free  and  civilized  and  which  comes  near  the  line 
of  barbarism  or  despotism.  For  example,  I  suppose  it 
would  be  very  difficult  to  get  Eussia  and  Japan  to  come  to 
a  common  agreement  on  this  point;  and  there  are  at  least 
some  citizens  of  other  nations,  not  to  speak  of  their  govern 
ments,  whom  it  would  also  be  hard  to  get  together. 

This  does  not  in  the  least  mean  that  it  is  hopeless  to 
make  the  effort.  It  may  be  that  some  scheme  will  be  de 
veloped.  America,  fortunately,  can  cordially  assist  in  such 
an  effort,  for  no  one  in  his  senses  would  suggest  our  dis 
armament;  and  though  we  should  continue  to  perfect  our 
small  navy  and  our  minute  army,  I  do  not  think  it  neces 
sary  to  increase  the  number  of  our  ships — at  any  rate  as 
things  look  now — nor  the  number  of  our  soldiers.  Of  course 
our  navy  must  be  kept  up  to  the  highest  point  of  efficiency, 
and  the  replacing  of  old  and  worthless  vessels  by  first- 
class  new  ones  may  involve  an  increase  in  the  personnel; 
but  not  enough  to  interfere  with  our  action  along  the  lines 
you  have  suggested.  But  before  I  would  know  how  to  advo 
cate  such  action,  save  in  some  such  way  as  commending  it 
to  the  attention  of  The  Hague  Tribunal,  I  would  have  to 
have  a  feasible  and  rational  plan  of  action  presented. 

It  seems  to  me  that  a  general  stop  in  the  increase  of  the 
war  navies  of  the  world  might  be  a  good  thing ;  but  I  would 
not  like  to  speak  too  positively  offhand.  Of  course  it  is 
only  in  continental  Europe  that  the  armies  are  too  large; 
and  before  advocating  action  as  regards  them  I  should 
have  to  weigh  matters  carefully — including  by  the  way 
such  a  matter  as  the  Turkish  army.  At  suiy  rate  nothing 


548    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

useful  can  be  done  unless  with  the  clear  recognition  that 
we  object  to  putting  peace  second  to  righteousness. 
Sincerely  yours, 

THEODOBE  EOOSEVELT. 

HON.  CAUL  SCHURZ,  Bolton  Landing, 
Lake  George,  N.  Y. 


In  my  own  judgment  the  most  important  service  that  I 
rendered  to  peace  was  the  voyage  of  the  battle  fleet  round 
the  world.  I  had  become  convinced  that  for  many  reasons 
it  was  essential  that  we  should  have  it  clearly  understood, 
by  our  own  people  especially,  but  also  by  other  peoples, 
that  the  Pacific  was  as  much  our  home  waters  as  the  Atlan 
tic,  and  that  our  fleet  could  and  would  at  will  pass  from  one 
to  the  other  of  the  two  great  oceans.  It  seemed  to  me 
evident  that  such  a  voyage  would  greatly  benefit  the  navy 
itself;  would  arouse  popular  interest  in  and  enthusiasm 
for  the  navy;  and  would  make  foreign  nations  accept  as 
a  matter  of  course  that  our  fleet  should  from  time  to  time 
be  gathered  in  the  Pacific,  just  as  from  time  to  time  it  was 
gathered  in  the  Atlantic,  and  that  its  presence  in  one  ocean 
was  no  more  to  be  accepted  as  a  mark  of  hostility  to  any 
Asiatic  power  than  its  presence  in  the  Atlantic  was  to  be 
accepted  as  a  mark  of  hostility  to  any  European  power. 
I  determined  on  the  move  without  consulting  the  Cabinet, 
precisely  as  I  took  Panama  without  consulting  the  Cabinet. 
A  council  of  war  never  fights,  and  in  a  crisis  the  duty  of  a 
leader  is  to  lead  and  not  to  take  refuge  behind  the  generally 
timid  wisdom  of  a  multitude  of  councillors.  At  that  time, 
as  I  happen  to  know,  neither  the  English  nor  the  German 
authorities  believed  it  possible  to  take  a  fleet  of  great  bat 
tleships  round  the  world.  They  did  not  believe  that  their 
own  fleets  could  perform  the  feat,  and  still  less  did  they 
believe  that  the  American  fleet  could.  I  made  up  my  mind 
that  it  was  time  to  have  a  show  down  in  the  matter ;  because 
if  it  was  really  true  that  our  fleet  could  not  get  from  the  At 
lantic  to  the  Pacific,  it  was  much  better  to  know  it  and  be 


THE   PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  549 

able  to  shape  our  policy  in  view  of  the  knowledge.  Many 
persons  publicly  and  privately  protested  against  the  move 
on  the  ground  that  Japan  would  accept  it  as  a  threat.  To 
this  I  answered  nothing  in  public.  In  private  I  said  that  I 
did  not  believe  Japan  would  so  regard  it  because  Japan 
knew  my  sincere  friendship  and  admiration  for  her  and 
realized  that  we  could  not  as  a  Nation  have  any  intention 
of  attacking  her;  and  that  if  there  were  any  such  feeling 
on  the  part  of  Japan  as  was  alleged  that  very  fact  rendered 
it  imperative  that  that  fleet  should  go.  When  in  the  spring 
of  1910  I  was  in  Europe  I  was  interested  to  find  that  high 
naval  authorities  in  both  Germany  and  Italy  had  expected 
that  war  would  come  at  the  time  of  the  voyage.  They 
asked  me  if  I  had  not  been  afraid  of  it,  and  if  I  had  not 
expected  that  hostilities  w^ould  begin  at  least  by  the  time 
that  the  fleet  reached  the  Straits  of  Magellan  ?  I  answered 
that  I  did  not  expect  it ;  that  I  believed  that  Japan  would 
feel  as  friendly  in  the  matter  as  we  did;  but  that  if  my 
expectations  had  proved  mistaken,  it  would  have  been  proof 
positive  that  we  were  going  to  be  attacked  anyhow,  and 
that  in  such  event  it  would  have  been  an  enormous  gain  to 
have  had  the  three  months'  preliminary  preparation  which 
enabled  the  fleet  to  start  perfectly  equipped.  In  a  per 
sonal  interview  before  they  left  I  had  explained  to  the 
officers  in  command  that  I  believed  the  trip  would  be  one 
of  absolute  peace,  but  that  they  were  to  take  exactly  the 
same  precautions  against  sudden  attack  of  any  kind  as  if 
we  were  at  war  with  all  the  nations  of  the  earth ;  and  that 
no  excuse  of  any  kind  would  be  accepted  if  there  were  a 
sudden  attack  of  any  kind  and  we  were  taken  unawares. 

My  prime  purpose  was  to  impress  the  American  people ; 
and  this  purpose  was  fully  achieved.  The  cruise  did  make 
a  very  deep  impression  abroad;  boasting  about  what  we 
have  done  does  not  impress  foreign  nations  at  all,  except 
unfavorably,  but  positive  achievement  does;  and  the  two 
American  achievements  that  really  impressed  foreign  peo 
ples  during  the  first  dozen  years  olthis  century  were  the 
digging  of  the  Panama  Canal  and  the  cruise  of  the  battle 


550    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT -AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

fleet  round  the  world.  But  the  impression  made  on  our  own 
people  was  of  far  greater  consequence.  No  single  thing 
in  the  history  of  the  new  United  States  Navy  has  done  as 
much  to  stimulate  popular  interest  and  belief  in  it  as  the 
world  cruise.  This  effect  was  forecast  in  a  well-informed 
and  friendly  English  periodical,  the  London  Spectator. 
Writing  in  October,  1907,  a  month  before  the  fleet  sailed 
from  Hampton  Koads,  the  Spectator  said: 

"All  over  America  the  people  will  follow  the  movements 
of  the  fleet ;  they  will  learn  something  of  the  intricate  de 
tails  of  the  coaling  and  commissariat  work  under  warlike 
conditions;  and  in  a  word  their  attention  will  be  aroused. 
Next  time  Mr.  Eoosevelt  or  his  representatives  appeal  to 
the  country  for  new  battleships  they  will  do  so  to  people 
whose  minds  have  been  influenced  one  way  or  the  other. 
The  naval  programme  will  not  have  stood  still.  We  are 
sure  that,  apart  from  increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  exist 
ing  fleet,  this  is  the  aim  which  Mr.  Koosevelt  has  in  mind. 
He  has  a  policy  which  projects  itself  far  into  the  future, 
but  it  is  an  entire  misreading  of  it  to  suppose  that  it  is 
aimed  narrowly  and  definitely  at  any  single  Power." 

I  first  directed  the  fleet,  of  sixteen  battleships,  to  go 
round  through  the  Straits  of  Magellan  to  San  Francisco. 
From  thence  I  ordered  them  to  New  Zealand  and  Australia, 
then  to  the  Philippines,  China  and  Japan,  and  home  through 
Suez — they  stopped  in  the  Mediterranean  to  help  the  suf 
ferers  from  the  earthquake  at  Messina,  by  the  way,  and 
did  this  work  as  effectively  as  they  had  done  all  their  other 
work.  Admiral  Evans  commanded  the  fleet  to  San  Fran 
cisco;  there  Admiral  Sperry  took  it;  Admirals  Thomas, 
Wainwright  and  Schroeder  rendered  distinguished  service 
under  Evans  and  Sperry.  The  coaling  and  other  prepa 
rations  were  made  in  such  excellent  shape  by  the  Depart 
ment  that  there  was  never  a  hitch,  not  so  much  as  the 
delay  of  an  hour,  in  keeping  every  appointment  made.  All 
the  repairs  were  made  without  difficulty,  the  ship  con 
cerned  merely  falling  out  of  column  for  a  few  hours,  and 
when  the  job  was  clone  steaming  at  speed  until  she  regained 


THE    PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  551 

her  position.  Not  a  ship  was  left  in  any  port;  and  there 
was  hardly  a  desertion.  As  soon  as  it  was  known  that  the 
voyage  was  to  be  undertaken  men  crowded  to  enlist,  just 
as  freely  from  the  Mississippi  Valley  as  from  the  seaboard, 
and  for  the  first  time  since  the  Spanish  War  the  ships  put  to 
sea  overmanned — and  by  as  stalwart  a  set  of  men-of-war's 
men  as  ever  looked  through  a  porthole,  game  for  a  fight 
or  a  frolic,  but  withal  so  self-respecting  and  with  such 
a  sense  of  responsibility  that  in  all  the  ports  in  which  they 
landed  their  conduct  was  exemplary.  The  fleet  practiced 
incessantly  during  the  voyage,  both  with  the  guns  and  in 
battle  tactics,  and  came  home  a  much  more  efficient  fighting 
instrument  than  when  it  started  sixteen  months  before. 
The  best  men  of  command  rank  in  our  own  service  were 
confident  that  the  fleet  would  go  round  in  safety,  in  spite 
of  the  incredulity  of  foreign  critics.  Even  they,  however, 
did  not  believe  that  it  was  wise  to  send  the  torpedo  craft 
around.  I  accordingly  acquiesced  in  their  views,  as  it  did 
not  occur  to  me  to  consult  the  lieutenants.  But  shortly  be 
fore  the  fleet  started,  I  went  in  the  Government  yacht  May 
flower  to  inspect  the  target  practice  off  Provincetown.  I 
was  accompanied  by  two  torpedo  boat  destroyers,  in  charge 
of  a  couple  of  naval  lieutenants,  thorough  gamecocks ;  and 
I  had  the  two  lieutenants  aboard  to  dine  one  evening. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  dinner  they  could  not  refrain  from 
asking  if  the  torpedo  flotilla  was  to  go  round  with  the  big 
ships.  I  told  them  no,  that  the  admirals  and  captains  did 
not  believe  that  the  torpedo  boats  could  stand  it,  and  be 
lieved  that  the  officers  and  crews  aboard  the  cockle  shells 
would  be  worn  out  by  the  constant  pitching  and  bouncing 
and  the  everlasting  need  to  make  repairs.  My  two  guests 
chorused  an  eager  assurance  that  the  boats  could  stand  it. 
They  assured  me  that  the  enlisted  men  were  even  more 
anxious  to  go  than  were  the  officers,  mentioning  that  on  one 
of  their  boats  the  terms  of  enlistment  of  most  of  the  crew 
were  out,  and  the  men  were  waiting  to  see  whether  or  not 
to  reenlist,  as  they  did  not  care  to  do  so  unless  the  boats 
were  to  go  on  the  cruise.  I  answered  that  I  was  only  too 


552    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

glad  to  accept  the  word  of  the  men  who  were  to  do  the 
job,  and  that  they  should  certainly  go ;  and  within  half  an 
hour  I  sent  out  the  order  for  the  flotilla  to  be  got  ready. 
It  w^ent  round  in  fine  shape,  not  a  boat  being  laid  up.  I  felt 
that  the  feat  reflected  even  more  credit  upon  the  navy  than 
did  the  circumnavigation  of  the  big  ships,  and  I  wrote  the 
flotilla  commander  the  following  letter:. 

May  18,  1908. 
My  dear  Captain  Cone: 

A  great  deal  of  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  feat  of 
our  battleship  fleet  in  encircling  South  America  and  getting 
to  San  Francisco;  and  it  would  be  hard  too  highly  to 
compliment  the  officers  and  enlisted  men  of  that  fleet  for 
what  they  have  done.  Yet  if  I  should  draw  any  distinction 
at  all  it  would  be  in  favor  of  you  and  your  associates  who 
have  taken  out  the  torpedo  flotilla.  Yours  was  an  even 
more  notable  feat,  and  every  officer  and  every  enlisted  man 
in  the  torpedo  boat  flotilla  has  the  right  to  feel  that  he 
has  rendered  distinguished  service  to  the  United  States 
navy  and  therefore  to  the  people  of  the  United  States ;  and 
I  wish  I  could  thank  each  of  them  personally.  Will  you 
have  this  letter  read  by  the  commanding  officer  of  each 
torpedo  boat  to  his  officers  and  crew? 

Sincerely  yours, 

THEODORE  ROOSEVELT. 

LIEUTENANT  COMMANDER  HUTCH.  I.  CONE,  U.  S.  N., 
Commanding  Second  Torpedo  Flotilla, 
Care  Postmaster,  San  Francisco,  Cal. 

There  were  various  amusing  features  connected  with  the 
trip.  Most  of  the  wealthy  people  and  " leaders  of  opinion" 
in  the  Eastern  cities  were  panic-struck  at  the  proposal  to 
take  the  fleet  away  from  Atlantic  waters.  The  great  New 
York  dailies  issued  frantic  appeals  to  Congress  to  stop  the 
fleet  from  going.  The  head  of  the  Senate  Committee  on 
Naval  Affairs  announced  that  the  fleet  should  not  and  could 
not  go  because  Congress  would  refuse  to  appropriate  the 


THE   PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  553 

money — lie  being  from  an  Eastern  seaboard  State.  How 
ever,  I  announced  in  response  that  I  had  enough  money  to 
take  the  fleet  around  to  the  Pacific  anyhow,  that  the  fleet 
would  certainly  go,  and  that  if  Congress  did  not  choose  to 
appropriate  enough  money  to  get  the  fleet  back,  why,  it 
would  stay  in  the  Pacific.  There  was  no  further  difficulty 
about  the  money. 

It  was  not  originally  my  intention  that  the  fleet  should 
visit  Australia,  but  the  Australian  Government  sent  a  most 
cordial  invitation,  which  I  gladly  accepted;  for  I  have,  as 
every  American  ought  to  have,  a  hearty  admiration  for, 
and  fellow  feeling  with,  Australia,  and  I  believe  that  Amer 
ica  should  be  ready  to  stand  back  of  Australia  in  any  serious 
emergency.  The  reception  accorded  the  fleet  in  Australia 
was  wonderful,  and  it  showed  the  fundamental  community 
of  feeling  between  ourselves  and  the  great  commonwealth 
of  the  South  Seas.  The  considerate,  generous,  and  open- 
handed  hospitality  with  which  the  entire  Australian  people 
treated  our  officers  and  men  could  not  have  been  surpassed 
had  they  been  our  own  countrymen.  The  fleet  first  visited 
Sydney,  which  has  a  singularly  beautiful  harbor.  The  day 
after  the  arrival  one  of  our  captains  noticed  a  member  of 
his  crew  trying  to  go  to  sleep  on  a  bench  in  the  park.  He 
had  fixed  above  his  head  a  large  paper  with  some  lines 
evidently  designed  to  forestall  any  questions  from  friendly 
would-be  hosts:  "I  am  delighted  with  the  Australian  peo 
ple.  I  think  your  harbor  the  finest  in  the  world.  I  am  very 
tired  and  would  like  to  go  to  sleep." 

The  most  noteworthy  incident  of  the  cruise  was  the  re 
ception  given  to  our  fleet  in  Japan.  In  courtesy  and  good 
breeding,  the  Japanese  can  certainly  teach  much  to  the 
nations  of  the  "Western  world.  I  had  been  very  sure  that 
the  people  of  Japan  would  understand  aright  what  the 
cruise  meant,  and  would  accept  the  visit  of  our  fleet  as  the 
signal  honor  which  it  was  meant  to  be,  a  proof  of  the  high 
regard  and  friendship  I  felt,  and  which  I  was  certain  the 
American  people  felt,  for  the  great  Island  Empire.  The 
event  even  surpassed  my  expectations.  I  cannot  too 


554    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

strongly  express  my  appreciation  of  the  generous  courtesy 
the  Japanese  showed  the  officers  and  crews  of  our  fleet; 
and  I  may  add  that  every  man  of  them  came  back  a  friend 
and  admirer  of  the  Japanese.  Admiral  Sperry  wrote  me  a 
letter  of  much  interest,  dealing  not  only  with  the  reception 
in  Tokyo  but  with  the  work  of  our  men  at  sea;  I  herewith 
give  it  almost  in  full : 

28  October,  1908. 
Dear  Mr.  Roosevelt: 

My  official  report  of  the  visit  to  Japan  goes  forward  in 
this  mail,  but  there  are  certain  aspects  of  the  affair  so 
successfully  concluded  which  cannot  well  be  included  in 
the  report. 

You  are  perhaps  aware  that  Mr.  Denison  of  the  Japanese 
Foreign  Office  was  one  of  my  colleagues  at  The  Hague, 
for  whom  I  have  a  very  high  regard.  Desiring  to  avoid 
every  possibility  of  trouble  or  misunderstanding,  I  wrote 
to  him  last  June  explaining  fully  the  character  of  our  men, 
which  they  have  so  well  lived  up  to,  the  desirability  of 
ample  landing  places,  guides,  rest  houses  and  places  for 
changing  money  in  order  that  there  might  be  no  delay  in 
getting  the  men  away  from  the  docks  on  the  excursions  in 
which  they  delight.  Very  few  of  them  go  into  a  drinking 
place,  except  to  get  a  resting  place  not  to  be  found  else 
where,  paying  for  it  by  taking  a  drink. 

I  also  explained  our  system  of  landing  with  liberty  men 
an  unarmed  patrol,  properly  officered,  to  quietly  take  in 
charge  and  send  off  to  their  ships  any  men  who  showed  the 
slightest  trace  of  disorderly  conduct.  This  letter  he  showed 
to  the  Minister  of  the  Navy,  who  highly  approved  of  all 
our  arrangements,  including  the  patrol,  of  which  I  feared 
they  might  be  jealous.  Mr.  Denison 's  reply  reached  me  in 
Manila,  with  a  memorandum  from  the  Minister  of  the  Navy 
which  removed  all  doubts.  Three  temporary  piers  were 
built  for  our  boat  landings,  each  300  feet  long,  brilliantly 
lighted  and  decorated.  The  sleeping  accommodations  did 
not  permit  two  or  three  thousand  sailors  to  remain  on 


THE   PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  555 

shore,  but  the  ample  landings  permitted  them  .to  be  handled 
night  and  day  with  perfect  order  and  safety. 

At  the  landings  and  railroad  station  in  Yokohama  there 
were  rest  houses  or  booths,  reputable  money  changers  and 
as  many  as  a  thousand  English-speaking  Japanese  college 
students  acted  as  volunteer  guides,  besides  Japanese  sail 
ors  and  petty  officers  detailed  for  the  purpose.  In  Tokyo 
there  were  a  great  many  excellent  refreshment  places, 
where  the  men  got  excellent  meals  and  could  rest,  smoke 
and  write  letters,  and  in  none  of  these  places  would  they 
allow  the  men  to  pay  anything,  though  they  were  more  than 
ready  to  do  so.  The  arrangements  were  marvelously  per 
fect. 

As  soon  as  your  telegram  of  October  18,  giving  the  ad 
dress  to  be  made  to  the  Emperor,  was  received,  I  gave 
copies  of  it  to  our  Ambassador  to  be  sent  to  the  Foreign 
Office.  It  seems  that  the  Emperor  had  already  prepared 
a  very  cordial  address  to  be  forwarded  through  me  to  you, 
after  delivery  at  the  audience,  but  your  telegram  reversed 
the  situation  and  his  reply  was  prepared.  I  am  convinced 
that  your  kind  and  courteous  initiative  on  this  occasion 
helped  cause  the  pleasant  feeling  which  was  so  obvious  in 
the  Emperor's  bearing  at  the  luncheon  which  followed  the 
audience.  X.,  who  is  reticent  and  conservative,  told  me 
that  not  only  the  Emperor  but  all  the  Ministers  were  pro 
foundly  gratified  by  the  course  of  events.  I  am  confident 
that  not  even  the  most  trifling  incident  has  taken  place 
which  could  in  any  way  mar  the  general  satisfaction,  and 
our  Ambassador  has  expressed  to  me  his  great  satisfac 
tion  with  all  that  has  taken  place. 

Owing  to  heavy  weather  encountered  on  the  passage  up 
from  Manila  the  fleet  was  obliged  to  take  about  3500  tons 
of  coal. 

The  Yankton  remained  behind  to  keep  up  communica 
tion  for  a  few  days,  and  yesterday  she  transmitted  the 
Emperor 's  telegram  to  you,  which  was  sent  in  reply  to  your 
message  through  our  Ambassador  after  the  sailing  of  the 
fleet.  It  must  be  profoundly  gratifying  to  you  to  have  the 


556    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

mission  on  which  you  sent  the  fleet  terminate  so  happily, 
and  I  am  profoundly  thankful  that,  owing  to  the  confi 
dence  which  you  displayed  in  giving  me  this  command,  my 
active  career  draws  to  a  close  with  such  honorable  dis 
tinction. 

As  for  the  effect  of  the  cruise  upon  the  training,  disci 
pline  and  effectiveness  of  the  fleet,  the  good  cannot  be  ex 
aggerated.  It  is  a  war  game  in  every  detail.  The  wireless 
communication  has  been  maintained  with  an  efficiency 
hitherto  unheard  of.  Between  Honolulu  and  Auckland, 
3850  miles,  we  were  out  of  communication  with  a  cable 
station  for  only  one  night,  whereas  three  [non- American] 
men-of-war  trying  recently  to  maintain  a  chain  of  only  1250 
miles,  between  Auckland  and  Sydney,  were  only  able  to  do 
so  for  a  few  hours. 

The  officers  and  men  as  soon  as  we  put  to  sea  turn  to 
their  gunnery  and  tactical  work  far  more  eagerly  than  they 
go  to  functions.  Every  morning  certain  ships  leave  the 
column  and  move  off  seven  or  eight  thousand  yards  as  tar 
gets  for  range  measuring  iire  control  and  battery  practice 
for  the  others,  and  at  night  certain  ships  do  the  same  thing 
for  night  battery  practice.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  this 
practice  is  unsatisfactory,  and  in  some  points  misleading, 
owing  to  the  fact  that  the  ships  are  painted  white.  At 
Portland,  in  1903, 1  saw  Admiral  Barker's  white  battleships 
under  the  searchlights  of  the  army  at  a  distance  of  14,000 
yards,  seven  sea  miles,  without  glasses,  while  the  Hartford, 
a  black  ship,  was  never  discovered  at  all,  though  she  passed 
within  a  mile  and  a  half.  I  have  for  years,  while  a  member 
of  the  General  Board,  advocated  painting  the  ships  war 
color  at  all  times,  and  by  this  mail  I  am  asking  the  Depart 
ment  to  make  the  necessary  change  in  the  Eegulations  and 
paint  the  ships  properly.  I  do  not  know  that  any  one  now 
dissents  from  my  view.  Admiral  Wainwright  strongly 
concurs,  and  the  War  College  Conference  recommended 
it  year  after  year  without  a  dissenting  voice. 

In  the  afternoons  the  fleet  has  two  or  three  hours '  prac- 


THE    PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  557 

tice  at  battle  maneuvers,  which  excite  as  keen  interest  as 
gunnery  exercises. 

The  competition  in  coal  economy  goes  on  automatically 
and  reacts  in  a  hundred  ways.  It  has  reduced  the  waste 
in  the  use  of  electric  light  and  water,  and  certain  chief 
engineers  are  said  to  keep  men  ranging  over  the  ships  all 
night  turning  out  every  light  not  in  actual  and  immediate 
use.  Perhaps  the  most  important  effect  is  the  keen  hunt 
for  defects  in  the  machinery  causing  waste  of  power.  The 
Yankton  by  resetting  valves  increased  her  speed  from  10 
to  11%  knots  on  the  same  expenditure. 

All  this  has  been  done,  but  the  field  is  widening,  the  work 
has  only  begun. 


C.  S.  SPEERY. 

When  I  left  the  Presidency  I  finished  seven  and  a  half 
years  of  administration,  during  which  not  one  shot  had  been 
fired  against  a  foreign  foe.  We  were  at  absolute  peace,  and 
there  was  no  nation  in  the  world  with  whom  a  war  cloud 
threatened,  no  nation  in  the  world  whom  we  had  wronged, 
or  from  whom  we  had  anything  to  fear.  The  cruise  of  the 
battle  fleet  was  not  the  least  of  the  causes  which  ensured 
so  peaceful  an  outlook. 

When  the  fleet  returned  after  its  sixteen  months'  voyage 
around  the  world  I  went  down  to  Hampton  Eoads  to  greet 
it.  The  day  was  Washington's  Birthday,  February  22, 
1907.  Literally  on  the  minute  the  homing  battlecraft  came 
into  view.  On  the  flagship  of  the  Admiral  I  spoke  to  the 
officers  and  enlisted  men,  as  follows: 

"Admiral  Sperry,  Officers  and  Men  of  the  Battle  Fleet: 

"Over  a  year  has  passed  since  yon  steamed  out  of  this 
harbor,  and  over  the  world's  rim,  and  this  morning  the 
hearts  of  all  who  saw  you  thrilled  with  pride  as  the  hulls 
of  the  mighty  warships  lifted  above  the  horizon.  You  have 


558    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

been  in  the  Northern  and  the  Southern  Hemispheres ;  four 
times  you  have  crossed  the  line ;  you  have  steamed  through 
all  the  great  oceans;  you  have  touched  the  coast  of  every 
continent.  Ever  your  general  course  has  been  westward: 
and  now  you  come  back  to  the  port  from  which  you  set 
sail.  This  is  the  first  battle  fleet  that  has  ever  circum 
navigated  the  globe.  Those  who  perform  the  feat  again 
can  but  follow  in  your  footsteps. 

"The  little  torpedo  flotilla  went  with  you  around  South 
America,  through  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  to  our  own 
Pacific  Coast.  The  armored  cruiser  squadron  met  you,  and 
left  you  again,  when  you  were  half  way  round  the  world. 
You  have  falsified  every  prediction  of  the  prophets  of 
failure.  In  all  your  long  cruise  not  an  accident  worthy  of 
mention  has  happened  to  a  single  battleship,  nor  yet  to 
the  cruisers  or  torpedo  boats.  You  left  this  coast  in  a  high 
state  of  battle  efficiency,  and  you  return  with  your  efficiency 
increased;  better  prepared  than  when  you  left,  not  only  in 
personnel  but  even  in  material.  During  your  world  cruise 
you  have  taken  your  regular  gunnery  practice,  and  skilled 
though  you  were  before  with  the  guns,  you  have  grown 
more  skilful  still ;  and  through  practice  you  have  improved 
in  battle  tactics,  though  here  there  is  more  room  for  im 
provement  than  in  your  gunnery.  Incidentally,  I  suppose 
I  need  hardly  say  that  one  measure  of  your  fitness  must 
be  your  clear  recognition  of  the  need  always  steadily  to 
strive  to  render  yourselves  more  fit;  if  you  ever  grow 
to  think  that  you  are  fit  enough,  you  can  make  up  your 
minds  that  from  that  moment  you  will  begin  to  go  back 
ward. 

As  a  war  machine,  the  fleet  comes  back  in  better  shape 
than  it  went  out.  In  addition,  you  the  officers  and  men  of 
this  formidable  fighting  force,  have  shown  yourselves  the 
best  of  all  possible  ambassadors  and  heralds  of  peace. 
Wherever  you  have  landed  you  have  borne  yourselves  so 
as  to  make  us  at  home  proud  of  being  your  countrymen. 
You  have  shown  that  the  best  type  of  fighting  man  of  the 
sea  knows  how  to  appear  to  the  utmost  possible  advantage 


THE    PEACE    OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS  559 

when  his  business  is  to  behave  himself  on  shore,  and  to 
make  a  good  impression  in  a  foreign  land.  We  are  proud 
of  all  the  ships  and  all  the  men  in  this  whole  fleet,  and  we 
welcome  you  home  to  the  country  whose  good  repute  among 
nations  has  been  raised  by  what  you  have  done.5' 


APPENDIX  A 
THE  TRUSTS,  THE  PEOPLE,  AND  THE  SQUARE  DEAL 

[Written  when  Mr.  Taft's  administration  brought  suit  to  dissolve  the 
steel  corporation,  one  of  the  grounds  for  the  suit  being  the  acquisition  by  the 
Corporation  of  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Company;  this  action  was  taken, 
with  my  acquiescence,  while  I  was  President,  and  while  Mr.  Taft  was  a  mem 
ber  of  my  cabinet;  at  the  time  he  never  protested  against,  and  as  far  as  I 
knew  approved  of  my  action  in  this  case,  as  in  the  Harvester  Trust  case,  and 
all  similar  cases.] 

The  suit  against  the  Steel  Trust  by  the  Government  has  brought 
vividly  before  our  people  the  need  of  reducing  to  order  our  chaotic 
Government  policy  as  regards  business.  As  President,  in  Messages 
to  Congress  I  repeatedly  called  the  attention  of  that  body  and  of 
the  public  to  the  inadequacy  of  the  Anti-Trust  Law  by  itself  to 
meet  business  conditions  and  secure  justice  to  the  people,  and  to 
the  further  fact  that  it  might,  if  left  unsupplemented  by  additional 
legislation,  work  mischief,  with  no  compensating  advantage;  and 
I  urged  as  strongly  as  I  knew  how  that  the  policy  followed  with 
relation  to  railways  in  connection  with  the  Inter-State  Commerce 
Law  should  be  followed  by  the  National  Government  as  regards  all 
great  business  concerns;  and  therefore  that,  as  a  first  step,  the 
powers  of  the  Bureau  of  Corporations  should  be  greatly  enlarged, 
or  else  that  there  should  be  created  a  Governmental  board  or  com 
mission,  with  powers  somewhat  similar  to  those  of  the  Inter-State 
Commerce  Commission,  but  covering  the  whole  field  of  inter- 
State  business,  exclusive  of  transportation  (which  should,  by  law, 
be  kept  wholly  separate  from  ordinary  industrial  business,  all 
common  ownership  of  the  industry  and  the  railway  being  for 
bidden).  In  the  end  I  have  always  believed  that  it  would  also 
be  necessary  to  give  the  National  Government  complete  power 
over  the  organization  and  capitalization  of  all  business  concerns 
engaged  in  inter-State  commerce. 

A  member  of  my  Cabinet  with  whom,  even  more  than  with  the 
various  Attorneys-General,  I  went  over  every  detail  of  the  trust 
situation,  was  the  one  time  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  Mr.  James  R. 
Garfield.  He  writes  me  as  follows  concerning  the  suit  against  the 
Steel  Corporation: 

"Nothing  appeared  before  the  House  Committee  that  made  me 
believe  we  were  deceived  by  Judge  Gary. 

"This,  I  think,  is  a  case  that  shows  clearly  the  difference  be- 

560 


APPENDIX    A  561 

tween  destructive  litigation  and  constructive  legislation.  I  have 
not  yet  seen  a  full  copy  of  the  Government's  petition,  but  our 
papers  give  nothing  that  indicates  any  kind  of  unfair  or  dishonest 
competition  such  as  existed  in  both  the  Standard  Oil  and  Tobacco 
Cases.  As  I  understand  it,  the  competitors  of  the  Steel  Company 
have  steadily  increased  in  strength  during  the  last  six  or  seven 
years.  Furthermore,  the  per  cent  of  the  business  done  by  the 
Steel  Corporation  has  decreased  during  that  time.  As  you  will 
remember,  at  our  first  conference  with  Judge  Gary,  the  Judge 
stated  that  it  was  the  desire  and  purpose  of  the  Company  to  con 
form  to  what  the  Government  wished,  it  being  the  purpose  of  the 
Company  absolutely  to  obey  the  law  both  in  spirit  and  letter. 
Throughout  the  time  that  I  had  charge  of  the  investigation,  and 
while  we  were  in  Washington,  I  do  not  know  of  a  single  instance 
where  the  Steel  Company  refused  any  information  requested ;  but, 
on  the  contrary,  aided  in  every  possible  way  our  investigation. 

"The  position  now  taken  by  the  Government  is  absolutely  de 
structive  of  ligitimate  business,  because  they  outline  no  rule  of  con 
duct  for  business  of  any  magnitude.  It  is  absurd  to  say  that  the 
courts  can  lay  down  such  rules.  The  most  the  courts  can  do  is  to 
find  as  legal  or  illegal  the  particular  transactions  brought  before 
them.  Hence,  after  years  of  tedious  litigation  there  would  be  no 
clear-cut  rule  for  future  action.  This  method  of  procedure  is  deal 
ing  with  the  device,  not  the  result,  and  drives  business  to  the 
elaboration  of  clever  devices,  each  of  which  must  be  tested  in  the 
courts. 

"I  have  yet  to  find  a  better  method  of  dealing  with  the  anti-trust 
situation  than  that  suggested  by  the  bill  which  we  agreed  upon  in 
the  last  days  of  your  Administration.  That  bill  should  be  used  as 
a  basis  for  legislation,  and  there  could  be  incorporated  upon  it 
whatever  may  be  determined  wise  regarding  the  direct  control 
and  supervision  of  the  National  Government,  either  through  a 
commission  similar  to  the  Inter-State  Commerce  Commission  or 
otherwise. ' ' 

Before  taking  up  the  matter  in  its  large  aspect,  I  wish  to  say  one 
word  as  to  one  feature  of  the  Government  suit  against  the  Steel 
Corporation.  One  of  the  grounds  for  the  suit  is  the  acquisition  by 
the  Steel  Corporation  of  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Company; 
and  it  has  been  alleged,  on  the  authority  of  the  Government 
officials  engaged  in  carrying  on  the  suit,  that  as  regards  this 
transaction  I  was  misled  by  the  representatives  of  the  Steel  Cor 
poration,  and  that  the  facts  were  not  accurately  or  truthfully 
laid  before  me.  This  statement  is  not  correct.  I  believed  at  the 
time  that  the  facts  in  the  case  were  as  represented  to  me  on  behalf 
of  the  Steel  Corporation,  and  my  further  knowledge  has  convinced 


562    THEODORE   ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

me  that  this  was  true.  I  believed  at  the  time  that  the  represen 
tatives  of  the  Steel  Corporation  told  me  the  truth  as  to  the  change 
that  would  be  worked  in  the  percentage  of  the  business  which  the 
proposed  acquisition  would  give  the  Steel  Corporation,  and  further 
inquiry  has  convinced  me  that  they  did  so.  I  was  not  misled.  The 
representatives  of  the  Steel  Corporation  told  me  the  truth  as  to 
what  the  effect  of  the  action  at  that  time  would  be,  and  any  state 
ment  that  I  was  misled  or  that  the  representatives  of  the  Steel 
Corporation  did  not  thus  tell  me  the  truth  as  to  the  facts  of  the 
case  is  itself  not  in  accordance  with  the  truth.  In  The  Outlook  of 
August  19  last  I  gave  in  full  the  statement  I  had  made  to  the 
Investigating  Committee  of  the  House  of  Representatives  on  this 
matter.  That  statement  is  accurate,  and  I  reaffirm  everything  I 
therein  said,  not  only  as  to  what  occurred,  but  also  as  to  my  belief 
in  the  wisdom  and  propriety  of  my  action — indeed,  the  action 
not  merely  was  wise  and  proper,  but  it  would  have  been  a  calamity 
from  every  standpoint  had  I  failed  to  take  it.  On  page  137  of  the 
printed  report  of  the  testimony  before  the  Committee  will  be 
found  Judge  Gary's  account  of  the  meeting  between  himself  and 
Mr.  Frick  and  Mr.  Root  and  myself.  This  account  states  the  facts 
accurately.  It  has  been  alleged  that  the  purchase  by  the  Steel 
Corporation  of  the  property  of  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Com 
pany  gave  the  Steel  Corporation  practically  a  monopoly  of  the 
Southern  iron  ores — that  is,  of  the  iron  ores  south  of  the  Potomac 
and  the  Ohio.  My  information,  which  I  have  every  reason  to 
believe  is  accurate  and  not  successfully  to  be  challenged,  is  that, 
of  these  Southern  iron  ores  the*  Steel  Corporation  has,  including 
the  property  gained  from  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Company, 
less  than  20  per  cent — perhaps  not  over  16  per  cent.  This  is  a 
very  much  smaller  percentage  than  the  percentage  it  holds  of  the 
Lake  Superior  ores,  which  even  after  the  surrender  of  the  Hill  lease 
will  be  slightly  over  50  per  cent.  According  to  my  view,  therefore, 
and  unless — which  I  do  not  believe  possible — these  figures  can  be 
successfully  challenged,  the  acquisition  of  the  Tennessee  Coal  and 
Iron  Company's  ores  in  no  way  changed  the  situation  as  regards 
making  the  Steel  Corporation  a  monopoly.1  The  showing  as  to  the 
percentage  of  production  of  all  kinds  of  steel  ingots  and  steel  cast 
ings  in  the  United  States  by  the  Steel  Corporation  and  by  all  other 
manufacturers  respectively  makes  an  even  stronger  case.  It  makes 
the  case  even  stronger  than  I  put  it  in  my  testimony  before  the 
Investigating  Committee,  for  I  was  scrupulously  careful  to  make 

i  My  own  belief  is  that  our  Nation  should  long  ago  have  adopted  the  policy 
of  merely  leasing  for  a  term  of  years  mineral-bearing  land;  but  it  is  the  fault 
of  us  ourselves,  of  the  people,  not  of  the  Steel  Corporation,  that  this  policy 
has  not  been  adopted. 


APPENDIX   A  563 

statements  that  erred,  if  at  all,  against  my  own  position.  It 
appears  from  the  figures  of  production  that  in  1901  the  Steel  Cor 
poration  had  to  its  credit  nearly  66  per  cent  of  the  total  produc 
tion  as  against  a  little  over  34  per  cent  by  all  other  steel  manu 
facturers.  The  percentage  then  shrank  steadily,  until  in  1906, 
the  year  before  the  acquisition  of  the  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron 
properties,  the  percentage  was  a  little  under  58  per  cent.  In  spite 
of  the  acquisition  of  these  properties,  the  following  year,  1907, 
the  total  percentage  shrank  slightly,  and  this  shrinking  has  con 
tinued  until  in  1910  the  total  percentage  of  the  Steel  Corporation 
is  but  a  little  over  54  per  cent,  and  the  percentage  by  all  other  steel 
manufacturers  but  a  fraction  less  than  46  per  cent.  Of  the  54%0 
per  cent  produced  by  the  Steel  Corporation  1%0  per  cent  is  pro 
duced  by  the  former  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Company.  In  other 
words,  these  figures  show  that  the  acquisition  of  the  Tennessee 
Coal  and  Iron  Company  did  not  in  the  slightest  degree  change 
the  situation,  and  that  during  the  ten  years  which  include  the 
acquisition  of  these  properties  by  the  Steel  Corporation  the  per 
centage  of  total  output  of  steel  manufacturers  in  this  country  by 
the  Steel  Corporation  has  shrunk  from  nearly  66  per  cent  to  but  a 
trifle  over  54  per  cent.  I  do  not  believe  that  these  figures  can  be 
successfully  controverted,  and  if  not  successfully  controverted  they 
show  clearly  not  only  that  the  acquisition  of  the  Tennessee  Coal 
and  Iron  properties  wrought  no  change  in  the  status  of  the  Steel 
Corporation,  but  that  the  Steel  Corporation  during  the  decade  has 
steadily  lost,  instead  of  gained,  in  monopolistic  character. 

So  much  for  the  facts  in  this  particular  case.  Now  for  the 
general  subject.  When  my  administration  took  office,  I  found, 
not  only  that  there  had  been  little  real  enforcement  of  the  Anti- 
Trust  Law  and  but  little  more  effective  enforcement  of  the  Inter- 
State  Commerce  Law,  but  also  that  the  decisions  were  so  chaotic 
and  the  laws  themselves  so  vaguely  drawn,  or  at  least  interpreted 
in  such  widely  varying  fashions,  that  the  biggest  business  men 
tended  to  treat  both  laws  as  dead  letters.  The  series  of  actions  by 
which  we  succeeded  in  making  the  Inter-State  Commerce  Law  an 
efficient  and  most  useful  instrument  in  regulating  the  transporta 
tion  of  the  country  and  exacting  justice  from  the  big  railways  with 
out  doing  them  injustice — while,  indeed,  on  the  contrary,  securing 
them  against  injustice — need  not  here  be  related.  The  Anti- 
Trust  Law  it  was  also  necessary  to  enforce  as  it  had  never  hitherto 
been  enforced;  both  because  it  was  on  the  statute-books  and  be 
cause  it  was  imperative  to  teach  the  masters  of  the  biggest  corpora 
tions  in  the  land  that  they  were  not,  and  would  not  be  permitted 
to  regard  themselves  as,  above  the  law.  Moreover,  where  the 
combination  has  really  been  guilty  of  misconduct  the  law  serves  a 


564    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

useful  purpose,  and  in  such  cases  as  those  of  the  Standard  Oil  and 
Tobacco  Trusts,  if  effectively  enforced,  the  law  confers  a  real  and 
great  good. 

Suits  were  brought  against  the  most  powerful  corporations  in  the 
land,  which  we  were  convinced  had  clearly  and  beyond  question 
violated  the  Anti-Trust  Law.  These  suits  were  brought  with 
great  care,  and  only  where  we  felt  so  sure  of  our  facts  that  we 
could  be  fairly  certain  that  there  was  a  likelihood  of  success.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  in  most  of  the  important  suits  we  were  successful. 
It  was  imperative  that  these  suits  should  be  brought,  and  very  real 
good  was  achieved  by  bringing  them,  for  it  was  only  these  suits 
that  made  the  great  masters  of  corporate  capital  in  America  fully 
realize  that  they  were  the  servants  and  not  the  masters  of  the  peo 
ple,  that  they  were  subject  to  the  law,  and  that  they  would  not  be 
permitted  to  be  a  law  unto  themselves;  and  the  corporations 
against  which  we  proceeded  had  sinned,  not  merely  by  being  big 
(which  we  did  not  regard  as  in  itself  a  sin),  but  by  being  guilty  of 
unfair  practices  towards  their  competitors,  and  by  procuring  un 
fair  advantages  from  the  railways.  But  the  resulting  situation 
has  made  it  evident  that  the  Anti-Trust  Law  is  not  adequate  to 
meet  the  situation  that  has  grown  up  because  of  modern  business 
conditions  and  the  accompanying  tremendous  increase  in  the  busi 
ness  use  of  vast  quantities  of  corporate  wealth.  As  I  have  said, 
this  was  already  evident  to  my  mind  when  I  was  President,  and 
in  communications  to  Congress  I  repeatedly  stated  the  facts.  But 
when  I  made  these  communications  there  were  still  plenty  of 
people  who  did  not  believe  that  we  would  succeed  in  the  suits 
that  had  been  instituted  against  the  Standard  Oil,  the  Tobacco, 
and  other  corporations,  and  it  was  impossible  to  get  the  public 
as  a  whole  to  realize  what  the  situation  was.  Sincere  zealots  who 
believed  that  all  combinations  could  be  destroyed  and  the  old-time 
conditions  of  unregulated  competition  restored,  insincere  politicians 
who  knew  better  but  made  believe  that  they  thought  whatever 
their  constituents  wished  them  to  think,  crafty  reactionaries  who 
wished  to  see  on  the  statute-books  laws  which  they  believed  un 
enforceable,  and  the  almost  solid  "Wall  Street  crowd'7  or  repre 
sentatives  of  "big  business"  who  at  that  time  opposed  with  equal 
violence  both  wise  and  necessary  and  unwise  and  improper  regu 
lation  of  business — all  fought  against  the  adoption  of  a  sane, 
effective,  and  far-reaching  policy. 

It  is  a  vitally  necessary  thing  to  have  the  persons  in  control  of 
big  trusts  of  the  character  of  the  Standard  Oil  Trust  and  Tobacco 
Trust  taught  that  they  are  under  the  law,  just  as  it  was  a  necessary 
thing  to  have  the  Sugar  Trust  taught  the  same  lesson  in  drastic 
fashion  by  Mr.  Henry  L.  Stimson  when  he  was  United  States 


APPENDIX   A  565 

District  Attorney  in  the  city  of  New  York.  But  to  attempt  to 
meet  the  whole  problem  not  by  administrative  governmental 
action,  but  by  a  succession  of  lawsuits  is  hopeless  from  the  stand 
point  of  working  out  a  permanently  satisfactory  solution.  More 
over,  the  results  sought  to  be  achieved  are  achieved  only  in  ex 
tremely  insufficient  and  fragmentary  measure  by  breaking  up  all 
big  corporations,  whether  they  have  behaved  well  or  ill,  into  a 
number  of  little  corporations  which  it  is  perfectly  certain  will  be 
largely,  and  perhaps  altogether,  under  the  same  control.  Such 
action  is  harsh  and  mischievous  if  the  corporation  is  guilty  of  noth 
ing  except  its  size;  and  where,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Standard  Oil, 
and  especially  the  Tobacco,  trusts,  the  corporation  has  been  guilty 
of  immoral  and  anti-social  practices,  there  is  need  for  far  more 
drastic  and  thoroughgoing  action  than  any  that  has  been  taken, 
under  the  recent  decree  of  the  Supreme  Court.  In  the  case  of  the 
Tobacco  Trust,  for  instance,  the  settlement  in  the  Circuit  Court, 
in  which  the  representatives  of  the  Government  seem  inclined  to 
concur,  practically  leaves  all  of  the  companies  still  substantially 
under  the  control  of  the  twenty-nine  original  defendants.  Such  a 
result  is  lamentable  from  the  standpoint  of  justice.  The  decision 
of  the  Circuit  Court,  if  allowed  to  stand,  means  that  the  Tobacco 
Trust  has  merely  been  obliged  to  change  its  clothes,  that  none  of 
the  real  offenders  have  received  any  real  punishment,  while,  as  the 
New  York  Times,  a  pro-trust  paper,  says,  the  tobacco  concerns, 
in  their  new  clothes,  are  in  positions  of  "ease  and  luxury/'  and 
"immune  from  prosecution  under  the  law." 

Surely,  miscarriage  of  justice  is  not  too  strong  a  term  to  apply 
to  such  a  result  when  considered  in  connection  with  what  the 
Supreme  Court  said  of  this  Trust.  That  great  Court  in  its  decision 
used  language  which,  in  spite  of  its  habitual  and  severe  self- 
restraint  in  stigmatizing  wrong-doing,  yet  unhesitatingly  condemns 
the  Tobacco  Trust  for  moral  turpitude,  saying  that  the  case  shows 
an  "ever  present  manifestation  ...  of  conscious  wrong-doing"  by 
the  Trust,  whose  history  is  "replete  with  the  doing  of  acts  which 
it  was  the  obvious  purpose  of  the  statute  to  forbid,  .  .  .  demon 
strative  of  the  existence  from  the  beginning  of  a  purpose  to  acquire 
dominion  and  control  of  the  tobacco  trade,  not  by  the  mere  exertion 
of  the  ordinary  right  to  contract  and  to  trade,  but  by  methods  de 
vised  in  order  to  monopolize  the  trade  by  driving  competitors  out 
of  business,  which  were  ruthlessly  carried  out  upon  the  assumption 
that  to  work  upon  the  fears  or  play  upon  the  cupidity  of  competitors 
would  make  success  possible."  The  letters  from  and  to  various 
officials  of  the  Trust,  which  were  put  in  evidence,  show  a  literally 
astounding  and  horrifying  indulgence  by  the  Trust  in  wicked  and 
depraved  business  methods — such  as  the  "endeavor  to  cause  a 


566    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

strike  in  their  [a  rival  business  firm's]  factory,"  or  the  "shutting 
off  the  market"  of  an  independent  tobacco  firm  by  "taking  the 
necessary  steps  to  give  them  a  warm  reception,"  or  forcing  import 
ers  into  a  price  agreement  by  causing  and  continuing  "a  demoral 
ization  of  the  business  for  such  length  of  time  as  may  be  deemed 
desirable"  (I  quote  from  the  letters).  A  Trust  guilty  of  such 
conduct  should  be  absolutely  disbanded,  and  the  only  way  to  pre 
vent  the  repetition  of  such  conduct  is  by  strict  Government  super 
vision,  and  not  merely  by  lawsuits. 

The  Anti-Trust  Law  cannot  meet  the  whole  situation,  nor  can 
any  modification  of  the  principle  of  the  Anti-Trust  Law  avail  to 
meet  the  whole  situation.  The  fact  is  that  many  of  the  men  who 
have  called  themselves  Progressives,  and  who  certainly  believe  that 
they  are  Progressives,  represent  in  reality  in  this  matter  not 
progress  at  all  but  a  kind  of  sincere  rural  toryism.  These  men 
believe  that  it  is  possible  by  strengthening  the  Anti-Trust  Law  to 
restore  business  to  the  competitive  conditions  of  the  middle  of  the 
last  century.  Any  such  effort  is  foredoomed  to  end  in  failure,  and, 
if  successful,  would  be  mischievous  to  the  last  degree.  Business 
cannot  be  successfully  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  practices 
and  theories  of  sixty  years  ago  unless  we  abolish  steam,  electricity, 
big  cities,  and,  in  short,  not  only  all  modern  business  and  modern 
industrial  conditions,  but  all  the  modern  conditions  of  our  civiliza 
tion.  The  effort  to  restore  competition  as  it  was  sixty  years  ago, 
and  to  trust  for  justice  solely  to  this  proposed  restoration  of  com 
petition,  is  just  as  foolish  as  if  we  should  go  back  to  the  flintlocks  of 
Washington's  Continentals  as  a  substitute  for  modern  weapons  of 
precision.  The  effort  to  prohibit  all  combinations,  good  or  bad, 
is  bound  to  fail,  and  ought  to  fail;  when  made,  it  merely  means 
that  some  of  the  worst  combinations  are  not  checked  and  that 
honest  business  is  checked.  Our  purpose  should  be,  not  to  strangle 
business  as  an  incident  of  strangling  combinations,  but  to  regulate 
big  corporations  in  thoroughgoing  and  effective  fashion,  so  as  to 
help  legitimate  business  as  an  incident  to  thoroughly  and  com 
pletely  safeguarding  the  interests  of  the  people  as  a  whole.  Against 
all  such  increase  of  Government  regulation  the  argument  is  raised 
that  it  would  amount  to  a  form  of  Socialism.  This  argument  is 
familiar ;  it  is  precisely  the  same  as  that  which  was  raised  against 
the  creation  of  the  Inter-State  Commerce  Commission,  and  of  all 
the  different  utilities  commissions  in  the  different  States,  as  I  my 
self  saw,  thirty  years  ago,  when  I  was  a  legislator  at  Albany,  and 
these  questions  came  up  in  connection  with  our  State  Government. 
Nor  can  action  be  effectively  taken  by  any  one  State.  Congress 
alone  has  power  under  the  Constitution  effectively  and  thoroughly 
and  at  all  points  to  deal  with  inter-State  commerce,  and  where 


APPENDIX   A  567 

Congress,  as  it  should  do,  provides  laws  that  will  give  the  Nation 
full  jurisdiction  over  the  whole  field,  then  that  jurisdiction  be 
comes,  of  necessity,  exclusive — although  until  Congress  does  act 
affirmatively  and  thoroughly  it  is  idle  to  expect  that  the  States  will 
or  ought  to  rest  content  with  non-action  on  the  part  of  both 
Federal  and  State  authorities.  This  statement,  by  the  way,  applies 
also  to  the  question  of  "usurpation"  by  any  one  branch  of  our 
Government  of  the  rights  of  another  branch.  It  is  contended  that 
in  these  recent  decisions  the  Supreme  Court  legislated;  so  it  did; 
and  it  had  to ;  because  Congress  had  signally  failed  to  do  its  duty 
by  legislating.  For  the  Supreme  Court  to  nullify  an  act  of  the 
Legislature  as  unconstitutional  except  on  the  clearest  grounds  is 
usurpation;  to  interpret  such  an  act  in  an  obviously  wrong  sense 
is  usurpation;  but  where  the  legislative  body  persistently  leaves 
open  a  field  which  it  is  absolutely  imperative,  from  the  public  stand 
point,  to  fill,  then  no  possible  blame  attaches  to  the  official  or  offi 
cials  who  step  in  because  they  have  to,  and  who  then  do  the 
needed  work  in  the  interest  of  the  people.  The  blame  in  such  cases 
lies  with  the  body  which  has  been  derelict,  and  not  with  the  body 
which  reluctantly  makes  good  the  dereliction. 

A  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  Senator  Cushman  K.  Davis,  a  states 
man  who  amply  deserved  the  title  of  statesman,  a  man  of  the  high 
est  courage,  of  the  sternest  adherence  to  the  principles  laid  down 
by  an  exacting  sense  of  duty,  an  unflinching  believer  in  democracy, 
who  was  as  little  to  be  cowed  by  a  mob  as  by  a  plutocrat,  and  more 
over  a  man  who  possessed  the  priceless  gift  of  imagination,  a  gift 
as  important  to  a  statesman  as  to  a  historian,  in  an  address  de 
livered  at  the  annual  commencement  of  the  University  of  Michigan 
on  July  1,  1886,  spoke  as  follows  of  corporations : 

"Feudalism,  with  its  domains,  its  untaxed  lords,  their  retainers, 
its  exemptions  and  privileges,  made  war  upon  the  aspiring  spirit  of 
humanity,  and  fell  with  all  its  grandeurs.  Its  spirit  walks  the  earth 
and  haunts  the  institutions  of  to-day,  in  the  great  corporations, 
with  the  control  of  the  National  highways,  their  occupation  of 
great  domains,  their  power  to  tax,  their  cynical  contempt  for  the 
law,  their  sorcery  to  debase  most  gifted  men  to  the  capacity  of 
splendid  slaves,  their  pollution  of  the  ermine  of  the  judge  and  the 
robe  of  the  Senator,  their  aggregation  in  one  man  of  wealth  so 
enormous  as  to  make  Croesus  seem  a  pauper,  their  picked,  paid, 
and  skilled  retainers  who  are  summoned  by  the  message  of  elec 
tricity  and  appear  upon  the  wings  of  steam.  If  we  look  into  the 
origin  of  feudalism  and  of  the  modern  corporations — those 
Dromios  of  history — we  find  that  the  former  originated  in  a  strict 
paternalism,  which  is  scouted  by  modern  economists,  and  that  the 
latter  has  grown  from  an  unrestrained  freedom  of  action,  aggres- 


568    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

sion,  and  development,  which  they  commend  as  the  very  ideal  of 
political  wisdom.  Laissez-faire,  says  the  professor,  when  it  often 
means  bind  and  gag  that  the  strongest  may  work  his  will.  It  is  a 
plea  for  the  survival  of  the  fittest— for  the  strongest  male  to  take 
possession  of  the  herd  by  a  process  of  extermination.  If  we  ex 
amine  this  battle  cry  of  political  polemics,  we  find  that  it  is  based 
upon  the  conception  of  the  divine  right  of  property,  and  the 
preoccupation  by  older  or  more  favored  or  more  alert  or  richer 
men  or  nations,  of  territory,  of  the  forces  of  nature,  of  machinery, 
of  all  the  functions  of  what  we  call  civilization.  Some  of  these 
men,  who  are  really  great,  follow  these  conceptions  to  their  con 
clusions  with  dauntless  intrepidity. ' ' 

When  Senator  Davis  spoke,  few  men  of  great  power  had  the 
sympathy  and  the '  vision  necessary  to  perceive  the  menace  con 
tained  in  the  growth  of  corporations ;  and  the  men  who  did  see  the 
evil  were  struggling  blindly  to  get  rid  of  it,  not  by  frankly  meeting 
the  new  situation  with  new  methods,  but  by  insisting  upon  the 
entirely  futile  effort  to  abolish  what  modern  conditions  had  ren 
dered  absolutely  inevitable.  Senator  Davis  was  under  no  such 
illusion.  He  realized  keenly  that  it  was  absolutely  impossible  to  go 
back  to  an  outworn  social  status,  and  that  we  must  abandon  defi 
nitely  the  laissez-faire  theory  of  political  economy,  and  fearlessly 
champion  a  system  of  increased  Governmental  control,  paying  no 
heed  to  the  cries  of  the  worthy  people  who  denounce  this  as 
Socialistic.  He  saw  that,  in  order  to  meet  the  inevitable  increase 
in  the  power  of  corporations  produced  by  modern  industrial  con 
ditions,  it  would  be  necessary  to  increase  in  like  fashion  the  activity 
of  the  sovereign  power  which  alone  could  control  such  corporations. 
As  has  been  aptly  said,  the  only  way  to  meet  a  billion-dollar  cor 
poration  is  by  invoking  the  protection  of  a  hundred-billion-dollar 
government;  in  other  words,  of  the  National  Government,  for  no 
State  Government  is  strong  enough  both  to  do  justice  to  corpora 
tions  and  to  exact  justice  from  them.  Said  Senator  Davis  in  this 
admirable  address,  which  should  be  reprinted  and  distributed 
broadcast : 

"The  liberty  of  the  individual  has  been  annihilated  by  the  logi 
cal  process  constructed  to  maintain  it.  We  have  come  to  a  political 
deification  of  Mammon.  Laissez-faire  is  not  utterly  blameworthy. 
It  begat  modern  democracy,  and  made  the  modern  republic  pos 
sible.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  that.  But  there  it  reached  its 
limit  of  political  benefaction,  and  began  to  incline  toward  the 
point  where  extremes  meet.  ...  To  every  assertion  that  the 
people  in  their  collective  capacity  of  a  government  ought  to  exert 
their  indefeasible  right,  of  self-defense,  it  is  said  you  touch  the 
sacred  rights  of  property." 


APPENDIX   A  569 

The  Senator  then  goes  on  to  say  that  we  now  have  to  deal  with 
an  oligarchy  of  wealth,  and  that  the  Government  must  develop 
power  sufficient  enough  to  enable  it  to  do  the  task. 

Few  will  dispute  the  fact  that  the  present  situation  is  not  satis 
factory,  and  cannot  be  put  on  a  permanently  satisfactory  basis 
unless  we  put  an  end  to  the  period  of  groping  and  declare  for  a 
fixed  policy,  a  policy  which  shall  clearly  define  and  punish  wrong 
doing,  which  shall  put  a  stop  to  the  iniquities  done  in  the  name  of 
business,  but  which  shall  do  strict  equity  to  business.  We  de 
mand  that  big  business  give  the  people  a  square  deal;  in  return 
we  must  insist  that  when  any  one  engaged  in  big  business  honestly 
endeavors  to  do  right  he  shall  himself  be  given  a  square  deal; 
and  the  first,  and  most  elementary,  kind  of  square  deal  is  to  give 
him  in  advance  full  information  as  to  just  what  he  can,  and  what 
he  cannot,  legally  and  properly  do.  It  is  absurd,  and  much  worse 
than  absurd,  to  treat  the  deliberate  lawbreaker  as  on  an  exact  par 
with  the  man  eager  to  obey  the  law,  whose  only  desire  is  to  find 
out  from  some  competent  Governmental  authority  what  the  law 
is,  and  then  to  live  up  to  it.  Moreover,  it  is  absurd  to  treat  the 
size  of  a  corporation  as  in  itself  a  crime.  As  Judge  Hook  says  in 
his  opinion  in  the  Standard  Oil  Case :  ' '  Magnitude  of  business  does 
not  alone  constitute  a  monopoly  .  .  .  the  genius  and  industry  of 
man  when  kept  to  ethical  standards  still  have  full  play,  and  what 
he  achieves  is  his  ...  success  and  magnitude  of  business,  the 
rewards  of  fair  and  honorable  endeavor  [are  not  forbidden]  .  .  . 
[the  public  welfare  is  threatened  only  when  success  is  attained] 
by  wrongful  or  unlawful  methods. ' '  Size  may,  and  in  my  opinion 
does,  make  a  corporation  fraught  with  potential  menace  to  the 
community;  and  may,  and  in  my  opinion  should,  therefore  make 
it  incumbent  upon  the  community  to  exercise  through  its  adminis 
trative  (not  merely  through  its  judicial)  officers  a  strict  supervision 
over  that  corporation  in  order  to  see  that  it  does  not  go  wrong; 
but  the  size  in  itself  does  not  signify  wrong-doing,  and  should  not 
be  held  to  signify  wrong-doing. 

Not  only  should  any  huge  corporation  which  has  gained  its 
position  by  unfair  methods,  and  by  interference  with  the  rights  of 
others,  by  demoralizing  and  corrupt  practices,  in  short,  by  sheer 
baseness  and  wrong-doing,  be  broken  up,  but  it  should  be  made  the 
business  of  some  administrative  governmental  body,  by  constant 
supervision,  to  see  that  it  does  not  come  together  again,  save  under 
such  strict  control  as  shall  insure  the  community  against  all  repe 
tition  of  the  bad  conduct — and  it  should  never  be  permitted  thus 
to  assemble  its  parts  as  long  as  these  parts  are  under  the  control 
of  the  original  offenders,  for  actual  experience  has  shown  that 
these  men  are,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  people  at  large,  unfit  to 


570    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

be  trusted  with  the  power  implied  in  the  management  of  a  large 
corporation.  But  nothing  of  importance  is  gained  by  breaking 
up  a  huge  inter-State  and  international  industrial  organization 
which  has  not  offended  otherwise  than  by  its  size,  into  a  number  of 
small  concerns  without  any  attempt  to  regulate  the  way  in  which 
those  concerns  as  a  whole  shall  do  business.  Nothing  is  gained  by 
depriving  the  American  Nation  of  good  weapons  wherewith  to 
fight  in  the  great  field  of  international  industrial  competition. 
Those  who  would  seek  to  restore  the  days  of  unlimited  and  uncon 
trolled  competition,  and  who  believe  that  a  panacea  for  our  indus 
trial  and  economic  ills  is  to  be  found  in  the  mere  breaking  up  of  all 
big  corporations,  simply  because  they  are  big,  are  attempting 
not  only  the  impossible,  but  what,  if  possible,  would  be  undesirable. 
They  are  acting  as  we  should  act  if  we  tried  to  dam  the  Mississippi, 
to  stop  its  flow  outright.  The  effort  would  be  certain  to  result  in 
failure  and  disaster;  we  would  have  attempted  the  impossible, 
and  so  would  have  achieved  nothing,  or  worse  than  nothing.  But 
by  building  levees  along  the  Mississippi,  not  seeking  to  dam  the 
stream,  but  to  control  it,  we  are  able  to  achieve  our  object  and  to 
confer  inestimable  good  in  the  course  of  so  doing. 

This  Nation  should  definitely  adopt  the  policy  of  attacking,  not 
the  mere  fact  of  combination,  but  the  evils  and  wrong-doing  which 
so  frequently  accompany  combination.  The  fact  that  a  combina 
tion  is  very  big  is  ample  reason  for  exercising  a  close  and  jealous 
supervision  over  it,  because  its  size  renders  it  potent  for  mischief; 
but  it  should  not  be  punished  unless  it  actually  does  the  mischief ; 
it  should  merely  be  so  supervised  and  controlled  as  to  guarantee  us, 
the  people,  against  its  doing  mischief.  "We  should  not  strive  for  a 
policy  of  unregulated  competition  and  of  the  destruction  of  all  big 
corporations,  that  is,  of  all  the  most  efficient  business  industries  in 
the  land.  Nor  should  we  persevere  in  the  hopeless  experiment  of 
trying  to  regulate  these  industries  by  means  only  of  lawsuits, 
each  lasting  several  years,  and  of  uncertain  result.  We  should 
enter  upon  a  course  of  supervision,  control,  and  regulation  of  these 
great  corporations — a  regulation  which  we  should  not  fear,  if  neces 
sary,  to  bring  to  the  point  of  control  of  monopoly  prices,  just  as  in 
exceptional  cases  railway  rates  are  now  regulated.  Either  the 
Bureau  of  Corporations  should  be  authorized,  or  some  other  govern 
mental  body  similar  to  the  Inter-State  Commerce  Commission 
should  be  created,  to  exercise  this  supervision,  this  authoritative 
control.  When  once  immoral  business  practices  have  been  elim 
inated  by  such  control,  competition  will  thereby  be  again  revived 
as  a  healthy  factor,  although  not  as  formerly  an  all-sufficient 
factor,  in  keeping  the  general  business  situation  sound.  Wherever 
immoral  business  practices  still  obtain — as  they  obtained  in  the 


APPENDIX   A  o7I 

cases  of  the  Standard  Oil  Trust  and  Tobacco  Trust — the  Anti- 
Trust  Law  can  be  invoked;  and  wherever  such  a  prosecution  is 
successful,  and  the  courts  declare  a  corporation  to  possess  a 
monopolistic  character,  then  that  corporation  should  be  completely 
dissolved,  and  the  parts  ought  never  to  be  again  assembled  save 
on  whatever  terms  and  under  whatever  conditions  may  be  im 
posed  by  the  governmental  body  in  which  is  vested  the  regulatory 
power.  Methods  can  readily  be  devised  by  which  corporations 
sincerely  desiring  to  act  fairly  and  honestly  can  on  their  own 
initiative  come  under  this  thoroughgoing  administrative  control  by 
the  Government  and  thereby  be  free  from  the  working  of  the 
Anti-Trust  Law.  But  the  law  will  remain  to  be  invoked  against 
wrongdoers;  and  under  such  conditions  it  could  be  invoked  far 
more  vigorously  and  successfully  than  at  present. 

It  is  not  necessary  in  an  article  like  this  to  attempt  to  work  out 
such  a  plan  in  detail.  It  can  assuredly  be  worked  out.  Moreover, 
in  my  opinion,  substantially  some  such  plan  must  be  worked  out  or 
business  chaos  will  continue.  Wrongdoing  such  as  was  perpe 
trated  by  the  Standard  Oil  Trust,  and  especially  by  the  Tobacco 
Trust,  should  not  only  be  punished,  but  if  possible  punished  in  the 
persons  of  the  chief  authors  and  beneficiaries  of  the  wrong,  far 
more  severely  than  at  present.  But  punishment  should  not  be  the 
only,  or  indeed  the  main,  end  in  view.  Our  aim  should  be  a  policy 
of  construction  and  not  one  of  destruction.  Our  aim  should  not 
be  to  punish  the  men  who  have  made  a  big  corporation  successful 
merely  because  they  have  made  it  big  and  successful,  but  to  exer 
cise  such  thoroughgoing  supervision  and  control  over  them  as  to 
insure  their  business  skill  being  exercised  in  the  interest  of  the 
public  and  not  against  the  public  interest.  Ultimately,  I  believe 
that  this  control  should  undoubtedly  indirectly  or  directly  extend 
to  dealing  with  all  questions  connected  with  their  treatment  of 
their  employees,  including  the  wages,  the  hours  of  labor,  and  the 
like.  Not  only  is  the  proper  treatment  of  a  corporation,  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  managers,  shareholders,  and  employees,  com 
patible  with  securing  from  that  corporation  the  best  standard  of 
public  service,  but  when  the  effort  is  wisely  made  it  results  in 
benefit  both  to  the  corporation  and  to  the  public.  The  success  of 
Wisconsin  in  dealing  with  the  corporations  within  her  borders,  so 
as  both  to  do  them  justice  and  to  exact  justice  in  return  from  them 
toward  the  public,  has  been  signal ;  and  this  Nation  should  adopt  a 
progressive  policy  in  substance  akin  to  the  progressive  policy  not 
merely  formulated  in  theory  but  reduced  to  actual  practice  with 
such  striking  success  in  Wisconsin. 

To  sum  up,  then.  It  is  practically  impossible,  and,  if  possible,  it 
would  be  mischievous  and  undesirable,  to  try  to  break  up  all  com- 


572    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT—AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

« 

binations  merely  because  they  are  large  and  successful,  and  to  put 
the  business  of  the  country  back  into  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth 
century  conditions  of  intense  and  unregulated  competition  between 
small  and  weak  business  concerns.  Such  an  effort  represents  not 
progressiveness  but  an  unintelligent  though  doubtless  entirely  well- 
meaning  toryism.  Moreover,  the  effort  to  administer  a  law  merely 
by  lawsuits  and  court  decisions  is  bound  to  end  in  signal  failure, 
and  meanwhile  to  be  attended  with  delays  and  uncertainties,  and 
to  put  a  premium  upon  legal  sharp  practice.  Such  an  effort  does 
not  adequately  punish  the  guilty,  and  yet  works  great  harm  to 
the  innocent.  Moreover,  it  entirely  fails  to  give  the  publicity 
which  is  one  of  the  best  by-products  of  the  system  of  control  by 
administrative  officials ;  publicity,  which  is  not  only  good  in  itself, 
but  furnishes  the  data  for  whatever  further  action  may  be  neces 
sary.  We  need  to  formulate  immediately  and  definitely  a  policy 
which,  in  dealing  with  big  corporations  that  behave  themselves 
and  which  contain  no  menace  save  what  is  necessarily  potential  in 
any  corporation  which  is  of  great  size  and  very  well  managed, 
shall  aim  not  at  their  destruction  but  at  their  regulation  and 
supervision,  so  that  the  Government  shall  control  them  in  such 
fashion  as  amply  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  the  whole  public, 
including  producers,  consumers,  and  wage-workers.  This  control 
should,  if  necessary,  be  pushed  in  extreme  cases  to  the  point  of 
exercising  control  over  monopoly  prices,  as  rates  on  railways  are 
now  controlled;  although  this  is  not  a  power  that  should  be  used 
when  it  is  possible  to  avoid  it.  The  law  should  be  clear,  unam 
biguous,  certain,  so  that  honest  men  may  not  find  that  unwittingly 
they  have  violated  it.  In  short,  our  aim  should  be,  not  to  destroy, 
but  effectively  and  in  thoroughgoing  fashion  to  regulate  and  con 
trol,  in  the  public  interest,  the  great  instrumentalities  of  modern 
business,  which  it  is  destructive  of  the  general  welfare  of  the 
community  to  destroy,  and  which  nevertheless  it  is  vitally  neces 
sary  to  that  general  welfare  to  regulate  and  control.  Competition 
will  remain  as  a  very  important  factor  when  once  we  have  de 
stroyed  the  unfair  business  methods,  the  criminal  interference  with 
the  rights  of  others,  which  alone  enabled  certain  swollen  combina 
tions  to  crush  out  their  competitors — and,  incidentally,  the  "  con 
servatives  "  will  do  well  to  remember  that  these  unfair  and  in 
iquitous  methods  by  great  masters  of  corporate  capital  have  done 
more  to  cause  popular  discontent  with  the  propertied  classes  than 
all  the  orations  of  all  the  Socialist  orators  in  the  country  put 
together. 

I  have  spoken  above  of  Senator  Davis 's  admirable  address  de 
livered  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago.  Senator  Davis 's  one-time 
partner,  Frank  B.  Kellogg,  the  Government  counsel  who  did  so 


APPENDIX   A  573 

much  to  win  success  for  the  Government  in  its  prosecutions  of  the 
trusts,  has  recently  delivered  before  the  Palimpsest  Club  of  Omaha 
an  excellent  address  on  the  subject;  Mr.  Prouty,  of  the  Inter- 
State  Commerce  Commission,  has  recently,  in  his  speech  before 
the  Congregational  Club  of  Brooklyn,  dealt  with  the  subject  from 
the  constructive  side ;  and  in  the  proceedings  of  the  American  Bar 
Association  for  1904  there  is  an  admirable  paper  on  the  need  of 
thoroughgoing  Federal  control  over  corporations  doing  an  inter- 
State  business,  by  Professor  Horace  L.  Wilgus,  of  the  University 
of  Michigan.  The  National  Government  exercises  control  over 
inter-State  commerce  railways,  and  it  can  in  similar  fashion, 
through  an  appropriate  governmental  body,  exercise  control  over 
all  industrial  organizations  engaged  in  inter-State  commerce. 
This  control  should  be  exercised,  not  by  the  courts,  but  by  an 
administrative  bureau  or  board  such  as  the  Bureau  of  Corpora 
tions  or  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission;  for  the  courts 
cannot  with  advantage  permanently  perform,  executive  and  ad 
ministrative  functions. 


APPENDIX  B 

THE    CONTROL    OF    CORPORATIONS    AND    "THE    NEW 

FREEDOM" 

In  his  book  "The  New  Freedom,"  and  in  the  magazine  articles 
of  which  it  is  composed,  which  appeared  just  after  he  had  been 
inaugurated  as  President,  Mr.  Woodrow  Wilson  made  an  entirely 
unprovoked  attack  upon  me  and  upon  the  Progressive  party  in 
connection  with  what  he  asserts  the  policy  of  that  party  to  be 
concerning  the  trusts,  and  as  regards  my  attitude  while  President 
about  the  trusts. 

I  am  reluctant  to  say  anything  whatever  about  President  Wilson 
at  the  outset  of  his  Administration  unless  I  can  speak  of  him  with 
praise.  I  have  scrupulously  refrained  from  saying  or  doing  one 
thing  since  election  that  could  put  the  slightest  obstacle,  even  of 
misinterpretation,  in  his  path.  It  is  to  the  interest  of  the  country 
that  he  should  succeed  in  his  office.  I  cordially  wish  him  success, 
and  I  shall  cordially  support  any  policy  of  his  that  I  believe  to  be 
in  the  interests  of  the  people  of  the  United  States.  But  when  Mr. 
Wilson,  after  being  elected  President,  within  the  first  fortnight 
after  he  has  been  inaugurated  into  that  high  office,  permits  himself 
to  be  betrayed  into  a  public  misstatement  of  what  I  have  said, 
and  what  I  stand  for,  then  he  forces  me  to  correct  his  statements. 

Mr.  Wilson  opens  his  article  by  saying  that  the  Progressive 
"doctrine  is  that  monopoly  is  inevitable,  and  that  the  only  course 
open  to  the  people  of  the  United  States  is  to  submit  to  it."  This 
statement  is  without  one  particle  of  foundation  in  fact.  I  chal 
lenge  him  to  point  out  a  sentence  in  the  Progressive  platform  or  in 
any  speech  of  mine  which  bears  him  out.  I  can  point  him  out  any 
number  which  flatly  contradict  him.  We  have  never  made  any 
such  statement  as  he  alleges  about  monopolies.  We  have  said: 
"The  corporation  is  an  essential  part  of  modern  business.  The 
concentration  of  modern  business,  ii-  some  degree,  is  both  inevitable 
and  necessary  for  National  and  international  business  efficiency." 
Does  Mr.  Wilson  deny  this?  Let  him  answer  yes  or  no,  directly. 
It  is  easy  for  a  politician  detected  in  a  misstatement  to  take  refuge 
in  evasive  rhetorical  hyperbole.  But  Mr.  Wilson  is  President  of 
the  United  States,  and  as  such  he  is  bound  to  candid  utterance  on 
every  subject  of  public  interest  which  he  himself  has  broached. 

574 


APPENDIX   B  575 

If  lie  disagrees  with  us,  let  him  be  frank  and  consistent,  and  rec 
ommend  to  Congress  that  all  corporations  be  made  illegal.  Mr. 
Wilson's  whole  attack  is  largely  based  on  a  deft  but  far  from  in 
genuous  confounding  of  what  we  have  said  of  monopoly,  which 
we  propose  so  far  as  possible  to  abolish,  and  what  we  have  said  of 
big  corporations,  which  we  propose  to  regulate;  Mr.  Wilson's  own 
vaguely  set  forth  proposals  being  to  attempt  the  destruction  of  both 
in  ways  that  would  harm  neither.  In  our  platform  we  use  the 
word  "monopoly"  but  once,  and  then  we  speak  of  it  as  an  abuse 
of  power,  coupling  it  with  stock-watering,  unfair  competition  and 
unfair  privileges.  Does  Mr.  Wilson  deny  this?  If  he  does,  then 
where  else  will  he  assert  that  we  speak  of  monopoly  as  he  says 
we  do  ?  He  certainly  owes  the  people  of  the  United  States  a  plain 
answer  to  the  question.  In  my  speech  of  acceptance  I  said:  "We 
favor  strengthening  the  Sherman  Law  by  prohibiting  agreements 
to  divide  territory  or  limit  output ;  refusing  to  sell  to  customers  who 
buy  from  business  rivals;  to  sell  below  cost  in  certain  areas  while 
maintaining  higher  prices  in  other  places;  using  the  power  of 
transportation  to  aid  or  injure  special  business  concerns;  and  all 
other  unfair  trade  practices. ' '  The  platform  pledges  us  to  ' '  guard 
and  keep  open  equally  to  all,  the  highways  of  American  commerce. ' ' 
This  is  the  exact  negation  of  monopoly.  Unless  Mr.  Wilson  is 
prepared  to  show  the  contrary,  surely  he  is  bound  in  honor  to 
admit  frankly  that  he  has  been  betrayed  into  a  misrepresentation, 
and  to  correct  it. 

Mr.  Wilson  says  that  for  sixteen  years  the  National  Adminis 
tration  has  "been  virtually  under  the  regulation  of  the  trusts," 
and  that  the  big  business  men  "have  already  captured  the  Gov 
ernment."  Such  a  statement  as  this  might  perhaps  be  pardoned 
as  mere  rhetoric  in  a  candidate  seeking  office — although  it  is  the 
kind  of  statement  that  never  under  any  circumstances  have  I 
permitted  myself  to  make,  whether  on  the  stump  or  off  the  stump, 
about  any  opponent,  unless  I  was  prepared  to  back  it  up  with 
explicit  facts.  But  there  is  an  added  seriousness  to  the  charge 
when  it  is  made  deliberately  and  in  cold  blood  by  a  man  who  is  at 
the  time  President.  In  this  volume  I  have  set  forth  my  relations 
with  the  trusts.  I  challenge  Mr.  Wilson  to  controvert  anything 
I  have  said,  or  to  name  any  trusts  or  any  big  business  men  who 
regulated,  or  in  any  shape  or  way  controlled,  or  captured,  the 
Government  during  my  term  as  President.  He  must  furnish  speci 
fications  if  his  words  are  taken  at  their  face  value — and  I  venture 
to  say  in  advance  that  the  absurdity  of  such  a  charge  is  patent 
to  all  my  fellow-citizens,  not  excepting  Mr.  Wilson.  ' 

Mr.  Wilson  says  that  the  new  party  was  founded  "under  the 
leadership  of  Mr.  Roosevelt,  with  the  conspicuous  aid — I  mention 


576    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

him  with  no  satirical  intention,  but  merely  to  set  the  facts  down 
accurately — of  Mr.  George  W.  Perkins,  organizer  of  the  Steel 
Trust."  Whether  Mr.  Wilson's  intention  was  satirical  or  not  is 
of  no  concern;  but  I  call  his  attention  to  the  fact  that  he  has 
conspicuously  and  strikingly  failed  "to  set  the  facts  down  accu 
rately."  Mr.  Perkins  was  not  the  organizer  of  the  Steel  Trust, 
and  when  it  was  organized  he  had  no  connection  with  it  or  with 
the  Morgan  people.  This  is  well  known,  and  it  has  again  and  again 
been  testified  to  before  Congressional  committees  controlled  by  Mr. 
Wilson's  friends  who  were  endeavoring  to  find  out  something 
against  Mr.  Perkins.  If  Mr.  Wilson  does  not  know  that  my  state 
ment  is  correct,  he  ought  to  know  it,  and  he  is  not  to  be  excused 
for  making  such  a  misstatement  as  he  has  made  when  he  has  not 
a  particle  of  evidence  in  support  of  it.  Mr.  Perkins  was  from  the 
beginning  in  the  Harvester  Trust  but,  when  Mr.  Wilson  points 
out  this  fact,  why  does  he  not  add  that  he  was  the  only  man  in 
that  trust  who  supported  me,  and  that  the  President  of  the  trust 
ardently  supported  Mr.  Wilson  himself?  It  is  disingenuous  to 
endeavor  to  conceal  these  facts,  and  to  mislead  ordinary  citizens 
about  them.  Under  the  administrations  of  both  Mr.  Taft  and  Mr. 
Wilson,  Mr.  Perkins  has  been  singled  out  for  special  attack,  obvi 
ously  not  because  he  belonged  to  the  Harvester  and  Steel  Trusts, 
but  because  he  alone  among  the  prominent  men  of  the  two  cor 
porations,  fearlessly  supported  the  only  party  which  afforded  any 
real  hope  of  checking  the  evil  of  the  trusts. 

Mr.  Wilson  states  that  the  Progressives  have  "a  programme 
perfectly  agreeable  to  monopolies." 

The  plain  and  unmistakable  inference  to  be  drawn  from  this  and 
other  similar  statements  in  his  article,  and  the  inference  which  he 
obviously  desired  to  have  drawn,  is  that  the  big  corporations  ap 
proved  the  Progressive  plan  and  supported  the  Progressive  can 
didate.  If  President  Wilson  does  not  know  perfectly  well  that  this 
is  not  the  case,  he  is  the  only  intelligent  person  in  the  United 
States  who  is  thus  ignorant.  Everybody  knows  that  the  over 
whelming  majority  of  the  heads  of  the  big  corporations  supported 
him  or  Mr.  Taft.  It  is  equally  well  known  that  of  the  corporations 
he  mentions,  the  Steel  and  the  Harvester  Trusts,  there  was  but 
one  man  who  took  any  part  in  the  Progressive  campaign,  and  that 
almost  all  the  others,  some  thirty  in  number,  were  against  us,  and 
some  of  them,  including  the  President  of  the  Harvester  Trust, 
openly  and  enthusiastically  for  Mr.  Wilson  himself.  If  he  reads 
the  newspapers  at  all,  he  must  know  that  practically  every  man 
representing  the  great  financial  interests  of  the  country,  and  with 
out  exception  every  newspaper  controlled  by  Wall  Street  or  State 
Street,  actively  supported  either  him  or  Mr.  Taft,  and  showed 


APPENDIX   B     .  577 

perfect  willingness  to  accept  either  if  only  they  could  prevent  the 
Progressive  party  from  coming  into  power  and  from  putting  its 
platform  into  effect. 

Mr.  Wilson  says  of  the  trust  plank  in  that  platform  that  it  "did 
not  anywhere  condemn  monopoly  except  in  words. "  Exactly  of 
what  else  could  a  platform  consist?  Does  Mr.  Wilson  expect  us 
to  use  algebraic  signs?  This  criticism  is  much  as  if  he  said  the 
Constitution  or  the  Declaration  of  Independence  contained  nothing 
but  words.  The  Progressive  platform  did  contain  words,  and  the 
words  were  admirably  designed  to  express  thought  and  meaning 
and  purpose.  Mr.  Wilson  says  that  I  long  ago  "classified  trusts 
for  us  as  good  and  bad,"  and  said  that  I  was  "afraid  only  of  the 
bad  ones."  Mr.  Wilson  would  do  well  to  quote  exactly  what  my 
language  was,  and  where  it  was  used,  for  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know 
what  statement  of  mine  it  is  to  which  he  refers.  But  if  he  means 
that  I  say  that  corporations  can  do  well,  and  that  corporations 
can  also  do  ill,  he  is  stating  my  position  correctly.  I  hold  that  a 
corporation  does  ill  if  it  seeks  profit  in  restricting  production  and 
then  by  extorting  high  prices  from  the  community  by  reason  of 
the  scarcity  of  the  product;  through  adulterating,  lyingly  adver 
tising,  or  overdriving  the  help;  or  replacing  men  workers  with 
children;  or  by  rebates;  or  in  any  illegal  or  improper  manner 
driving  competitors  out  of  its  way ;  or  seeking  to  achieve  monopoly 
by  illegal  or  unethical  treatment  of  its  competitors,  or  in  any 
shape  or  way  offending  against  the  moral  law  either  in  connection 
with  the  public  or  with  its  employees  or  with  its  rivals.  Any 
corporation  which  seeks  its  profit  in  such  fashion  is  acting  badly. 
It  is,  in  fact,  a  conspiracy  against  the  public  welfare  which  the 
Government  should  use  all  its  powers  to  suppress.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  a  corporation  seeks  profit  solely  by  increasing  its 
products  through  eliminating  waste,  improving  its  processes,  util 
izing  its  by-products,  installing  better  machines,  raising  wages  in 
the  effort  to  secure  more  efficient  help,  introducing  the  principle 
of  cooperation  and  mutual  benefit,  dealing  fairly  with  labor  unions, 
setting  its  face  against  the  underpayment  of  women  and  the  em 
ployment  of  children;  in  a  word,  treating  the  public  fairly  and 
its  rivals  fairly:  then  such  a  corporation  is  behaving  well.  It  is 
an  instrumentality  of  civilization  operating  to  promote  abundance 
by  cheapening  the  cost  of  living  so  as  to  improve  conditions  every 
where  throughout  the  whole  community.  Does  Mr.  Wilson  con 
trovert  either  of  these  statements?  If  so,  let  him  answer  directly. 
It  is  a  matter  of  capital  importance  to  the  country  that  his  posi 
tion  in  this  respect  be  stated  directly,  not  by  indirect  suggestion. 

Much  of  Mr.  Wilson 's  article,  although  apparently  aimed  at  the 
Progressive  party,  is  both  so  rhetorical  and  so  vague  as  to  need  no 


578    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

answer.  He  does,  however,  specifically  assert  (among  other  things 
equally  without  warrant  in  fact)  that  the  Progressive  party  says 
that  it  is  "futile  to  undertake  to  prevent  monopoly/'  and  only 
ventures  to  ask  the  trusts  to  be  "kind"  and  "pitiful"!  It  is  a 
little  difficult  to  answer  a  misrepresentation  of  the  facts  so  radical 
— not  to  say  preposterous — with  the  respect  that  one  desires  to 
use  in  speaking  of  or  to  the  President  of  the  United  States.  I 
challenge  President  Wilson  to  point  to  one  sentence  of  our  platform 
or  of  my  speeches  which  affords  the  faintest  justification  for  these 
assertions.  Having  made  this  statement  in  the  course  of  an  un 
provoked  attack  on  me,  he  cannot  refuse  to  show  that  it  is  true. 
I  deem  it  necessary  to  emphasize  here  (but  with  perfect  respect) 
that  I  am  asking  for  a  plain  statement  of  fact,  not  for  a  display  of 
rhetoric.  I  ask  him,  as  is  my  right  under  the  circumstances,  to 
quote  the  exact  language  which  justifies  him  in  attributing  these 
views  to  us.  If  he  cannot  do  this,  then  a  frank  acknowledgment 
on  his  part  is  due  to  himself  and  to  the  people.  I  quote  from  the 
Progressive  platform:  "Behind  the  ostensible  Government  sits  en 
throned  an  invisible  Government,  owing  no  allegiance  and  ac 
knowledging  no  responsibility  to  the  people.  To  destroy  this 
invisible  Government,  to  dissolve  the  unholy  alliance  between  cor 
rupt  business  and  corrupt  politics,  is  the  first  task  of  the  states 
manship  of  the  day.  .  .  .  This  country  belongs  to  the  people.  Its 
resources,  its  business,  its  laws,  its  institutions,  should  be  utilized, 
maintained,  or  altered  in  whatever  manner  will  best  promote  the 
general  interest."  This  assertion  is  explicit.  We  say  directly 
that  "the  people"  are  absolutely  to  control  in  any  way  they  see 
fit,  the  "business"  of  the  country.  I  again  challenge  Mr.  Wilson 
to  quote  any  words  of  the  platform  that  justify  the  statements 
he  has  made  to  the  contrary.  If  he  cannot  do  it — and  of  course 
he  cannot  do  it,  and  he  must  know  that  he  cannot  do  it — surely 
he  will  not  hesitate  to  say  so  frankly. 

Mr.  Wilson  must  know  that  every  monopoly  in  the  United  States 
opposes  the  Progressive  party.  If  he  challenges  this  statement,  I 
challenge  him  in  return  (as  is  clearly  my  right)  to  name  the 
monopoly  that  did  support  the  Progressive  party,  whether  it  was 
the  Sugar  Trust,  the  Steel  Trust,  the  Harvester  Trust,  the  Standard 
Oil  Trust,  the  Tobacco  Trust,  or  any  other.  Every  sane  man  in 
the  country  knows  well  that  there  is  not  one  word  of  justification 
that  can  truthfully  be  adduced  for  Mr.  Wilson's  statement  that 
the  Progressive  programme  was  agreeable  to  the  monopolies.  Ours 
was  the  only  programme  to  which  they  objected,  and  they  sup 
ported  either  Mr.  Wilson  or  Mr.  Taft  against  me,  indifferent  as  to 
which  of  them,  might  be  elected  so  long  as  I  was  defeated.  Mr. 
Wilson  says  that  I  got  my  "idea  with  regard  to  the  regulation  of 


APPENDIX   B  579 

monopoly  from,  the  gentlemen  who  form  the  United  States  Steel 
Corporation."  Does  Mr.  Wilson  pretend  that  Mr.  Van  Hise  and 
Mr.  Croly  got  their  ideas  from  the  Steel  Corporation?  Is  Mr. 
Wilson  unaware  of  the  elementary  fact  that  most  modern  econo 
mists  believe  that  unlimited,  unregulated  competition  is  the  source 
of  evils  which  all  men  now  concede  must  be  remedied  if  this  civ 
ilization  of  ours  is  to  survive?  Is  he  ignorant  of  the  fact  that 
the  Socialist  party  has  long  been  against  unlimited  competition? 
This  statement  of  Mr.  Wilson  cannot  be  characterized  properly 
with  any  degree  of  regard  for  the  office  Mr.  Wilson  holds.  Why, 
the  ideas  that  I  have  championed  as  to  controlling  and  regulating 
both  competition  and  combination  in  the  interest  of  the  people,  so 
that  the  people  shall  be  masters  over  both,  have  been  in  the  air  in 
this  country  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.  I  was  merely  the  first 
prominent  candidate  for  President  who  took  them  up.  They  are 
the  progressive  ideas,  and  progressive  business  men  must  in  the 
end  come  to  them,  for  I  firmly  believe  that  in  the  end  all  wise  and 
honest  business  men,  big  and  little,  will  support  our  programme. 
Mr.  Wilson  in  opposing  them  is  the  mere  apostle  of  reaction.  He 
says  that  I  got  my  '  *  ideas  from  the  gentlemen  who  form  the  Steel 
Corporation."  I  did  not.  But  I  will  point  out  to  him  something 
in  return.  It  was  he  himself,  and  Mr.  Taft,  who  got  the  votes 
and  the  money  of  these  same  gentlemen,  and  of  those  in  the 
Harvester  Trust. 

Mr.  Wilson  has  promised  to  break  up  all  trusts.  He  can  do  so 
only  by  proceeding  at  law.  If  he  proceeds  at  law,  he  can  hope 
for  success  only  by  taking  what  I  have  done  as  a  precedent.  In 
fact,  what  I  did  as  President  is  the  base  of  every  action  now 
taken  or  that  can  be  now  taken  looking  toward  the  control  of 
corporations,  or  the  suppression  of  monopolies.  The  decisions  ren 
dered  in  various  cases  brought  by  my  direction  constitute  the 
authority  on  which  Mr.  Wilson  must  base  any  action  that  he  may 
bring  to  curb  monopolistic  control.  Will  Mr.  Wilson  deny  this, 
or  question  it  in  any  way?  With  what  grace  can  he  describe  my 
Administration  as  satisfactory  to  the  trusts  when  he  knows  that 
he  cannot  redeem  a  single  promise  that  he  has  made  to  war  upon 
the  trusts  unless  he  avails  himself  of  weapons  of  which  the  Federal 
Government  had  been  deprived  before  I  became  President,  and 
which  were  restored  to  it  during  my  Administration  and  through 
proceedings  which  I  directed?  Without  my  action  Mr.  Wilson 
could  not  now  undertake  or  carry  on  a  single  suit  against  a  monop 
oly,  and,  moreover,  if  it  had  not  been  for  my  action  and  for  the 
judicial  decision  in  consequence  obtained,  Congress  would  be  help 
less  to  pass  a  single  law  against  monopoly. 

Let  Mr.  Wilson  mark  that  the  men  who  organized  and  directed 


580    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT— AN   AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

the  Northern  Securities  Company  were  also  the  controlling  forces 
in  the  very  Steel  Corporation  which  Mr.  Wilson  makes  believe  to 
think  was  supporting  me.  I  challenge  Mr.  Wilson  to  deny  this, 
and  yet  he  well  knew  that  it  was  my  successful  suit  against  the 
Northern  Securities  Company  which  first  efficiently  established 
the  power  of  the  people  over  the  trusts. 

After  reading  Mr.  Wilson's  book,  I  am  still  entirely  in  the  dark 
as  to  what  he  means  by  the  "New  Freedom."  Mr.  Wilson  is  an 
accomplished  and  scholarly  man,  a  master  of  rhetoric,  and  the 
sentences  in  the  book  are  well-phrased  statements,  usually  incul 
cating  a  morality  which  is  sound  although  vague  and  ill  denned. 
There  are  certain  proposals  (already  long  set  forth  and  practiced 
by  me  and  by  others  who  have  recently  formed  the  Progressive 
party)  made  by  Mr.  Wilson  with  which  I  cordially  agree.  There 
are,  however,  certain  things  he  has  said,  even  as  regards  matters 
of  abstract  morality,  with  which  I  emphatically  disagree.  For 
example,  in  arguing  for  proper  business  publicity,  as  to  which  I 
cordially  agree  with  Mr.  Wilson,  he  commits  himself  to  the  fol 
lowing  statement: 

"You  know  there  is  temptation  in  loneliness  and  secrecy. 
Haven't  you  experienced  it?  I  have.  We  are  never  so  proper 
in  our  conduct  as  when  everybody  can  look  and  see  exactly  what 
we  are  doing.  If  you  are  off  in  some  distant  part  of  the  world  and 
suppose  that  nobody  who  lives  within  a  mile  of  your  home  is  any 
where  around,  there  are  times  when  you  adjourn  your  ordinary 
standards.  You  say  to  yourself,  '  Well,  I  '11  have  a  fling  this  time ; 
nobody  will  know  anything  about  it.'  If  you  were  on  the  Desert 
of  Sahara,  you  would  feel  that  you  might  permit  yourself — well, 
say,  some  slight  latitude  of  conduct;  but  if  you  saw  one  of  your 
immediate  neighbors  coming  the  other  way  on  a  camel,  you  would 
behave  yourself  until  he  got  out  of  sight.  The  most  dangerous 
thing  in  the  world  is  to  get  off  where  nobody  knows  you.  I  advise 
you  to  stay  around  among  the  neighbors,  and  then  you  may  keep 
out  of  jail.  That  is  the  only  way  some  of  us  can  keep  out  of  jail." 

I  emphatically  disagree  with  what  seems  to  be  the  morality  in 
culcated  in  this  statement,  which  is  that  a  man  is  expected  to  do 
and  is  to  be  pardoned  for  doing  all  kinds  of  immoral  things  if  he 
does  them  alone  and  does  not  expect  to  be  found  out.  Surely  it 
is  not  necessary,  in  insisting  upon  proper  publicity,  to  preach  a 
morality  of  so  basely  material  a  character. 

There  is  much  more  that  Mr.  Wilson  says  as  to  which  I  do  not 
understand  him  clearly,  and  where  I  condemn  what  I  do  under 
stand.  In  economic  matters  the  course  he  advocates  as  part  of  the 
"New  Freedom"  simply  means  the  old,  old  "freedom"  of  leaving 
the  individual  strong  man  at  liberty,  unchecked  by  common  ac- 


APPENDIX   B  581 

tion,  to  prey  on  the  weak  and  the  helpless.  The  "New  Freedom'' 
in  the  abstract  seems  to  be  the  freedom  of  the  big  to  devour  the 
little.  In  the  concrete  I  may  add  that  Mr.  Wilson's  misrepresenta 
tions  of  what  I  have  said  seem  to  indicate  that  he  regards  the  new 
freedom  as  freedom  from  all  obligation  to  obey  the  Ninth  Com 
mandment. 

But,  after  all,  my  views  or  the  principles  of  the  Progressive  party 
are  of  much  less  importance  now  than  the  purposes  of  Mr.  Wilson. 
These  are  wrapped  in  impenetrable  mystery.  His  speeches  and 
writings  serve  but  to  make  them  more  obscure.  If  these  attempts 
to  refute  his  misrepresentation  of  my  attitude  towards  the  trusts 
should  result  in  making  his  own  clear,  then  this  discussion  will 
have  borne  fruits  of  substantial  value  to  the  country.  If  Mr.  Wil 
son  has  any  plan  of  his  own  for  dealing  with  the  trusts,  it  is  to 
suppress  all  great  industrial  organizations — presumably  on  the 
principle  proclaimed  by  his  Secretary  of  State  four  years  ago,  that 
every  corporation  which  produced  more  than  a  certain  percentage 
of  a  given  commodity — I  think  the  amount  specified  was  twenty- 
five  per  cent — no  matter  how  valuable  its  service,  should  be  sup 
pressed.  The  simple  fact  is  that  such  a  plan  is  futile.  In  opera 
tion  it  would  do  far  more  damage  than  it  could  remedy.  The 
Progressive  plan  would  give  the  people  full  control  of,  and  in 
masterful  fashion  prevent  all  wrongdoing  by,  the  trusts,  while 
utilizing  for  the  public  welfare  every  industrial  energy  and  ability 
that  operates  to  swell  abundance,  while  obeying  strictly  the  moral 
law  and  the  law  of  the  land.  Mr.  Wilson's  plan  would  ultimately 
benefit  the  trusts  and  would  permanently  damage  nobody  but  the 
people.  For  example,  one  of  the  steel  corporations  which  has  been 
guilty  of  the  worst  practices  toward  its  employees  is  the  Colorado 
Fuel  and  Iron  Company.  Mr.  Wilson  and  Mr.  Bryan's  plan 
would,  if  successful,  merely  mean  permitting  four  such  companies, 
absolutely  uncontrolled,  to  monopolize  every  big  industry  in  the 
country.  To  talk  of  such  an  accomplishment  as  being  "The  New 
Freedom"  is  enough  to  make  the  term  one  of  contemptuous  de 
rision. 

President  Wilson  has  made  explicit  promises,  and  the  Demo 
cratic  platform  has  made  explicit  promises.  Mr.  Wilson  is  now 
in  power,  with  a  Democratic  Congress  in  both  branches.  He  and 
the  Democratic  platform  have  promised  to  destroy  the  trusts,  to 
reduce  the  cost  of  living,  and  at  the  same  time  to  increase  the  well- 
being  of  the  farmer  and  of  the  workingman — which  of  course  must 
mean  to  increase  the  profits  of  the  farmer  and  the  wages  of  the 
workingman.  He  and  his  party  won  the  election  on  this  promise. 
We  have  a  right  to  expect  that  they  will  keep  it.  If  Mr.  Wilson 's 
promises  mean  anything  except  the  very  emptiest  words,  he  is 


582    THEODORE    ROOSEVELT-AN    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

pledged  to  accomplish  the  beneficent  purposes  he  avows  by  break 
ing  up  all  the  trusts  and  combinations  and  corporations  so  as  to 
restore  competition  precisely  as  it  was  fifty  years  ago.  If  he  does 
not  mean  this,  he  means  nothing.  He  cannot  do  anything  else 
under  penalty  of  showing  that  his  promise  and  his  performance  do 
not  square  with  each  other. 

Mr.  Wilson  says  that  '  *  the  trusts  are  our  masters  now,  but  I  for 
one  do  not  care  to  live  in  a  country  called  free  even  under  kind 
masters. "  Good!  The  Progressives  are  opposed  to  having  mas 
ters,  kind  or  unwind,  and  they  do  not  believe  that  a  "new  free 
dom  "  which  in  practice  would  mean  leaving  four  Fuel  and  Iron 
Companies  free  to  do  what  they  like  in  every  industry  would  be  of 
much  benefit  to  the  country.  The  Progressives  have  a  clear  and 
definite  programme  by  which  the  people  would  be  the  masters  of 
the  trusts  instead  of  the  trusts  being  their  masters,  as  Mr.  Wilson 
says  they  are.  With  practical  unanimity  the  trusts  supported  the 
opponents  of  this  programme,  Mr.  Taft  and  Mr.  Wilson,  and  they 
evidently  dreaded  our  programme  infinitely  more  than  anything 
that  Mr.  Wilson  threatened.  The  people  have  accepted  Mr.  Wil 
son's  assurances.  Now  let  him  make  his  promises  good.  He  is 
committed,  if  his  words  mean  anything,  to  the  promise  to  break 
up  every  trust,  every  big  corporation — perhaps  every  small  cor 
poration — in  the  United  States — not  to  go  through  the  motions 
of  breaking  them  up,  but  really  to  break  them  up.  He  is  committed 
against  the  policy  (of  efficient  control  and  mastery  of  the  big  cor 
porations  both  by  law  and  by  administrative  action  in  coopera 
tion)  proposed  by  the  Progressives.  Let  him  keep  faith  with  the 
people ;  let  him  in  good  faith  try  to  keep  the  promises  he  has  thus 
repeatedly  made.  I  believe  that  his  promise  is  futile  and  cannot 
be  kept.  I  believe  that  any  attempt  sincerely  to  keep  it  and  in 
good  faith  to  carry  it  out  will  end  in  either  nothing  at  all  or  in 
disaster.  But  my  beliefs  are  of  no  consequence.  Mr.  Wilson  is 
President.  It  is  his  acts  that  are  of  consequence.  He  is  bound  in 
honor  to  the  people  of  the  United  States  to  keep  his  promise,  and 
to  break  up,  not  nominally  but  in  reality,  all  big  business,  all 
trusts,  all  combinations  of  every  sort,  kind,  and  description,  and 
probably  all  corporations.  What  he  says  is  henceforth  of  little 
consequence.  The  important  thing  is  what  he  does,  and  how  the 
results  of  what  he  does  square  with  the  promises  and  prophecies 
he  made  when  all  he  had  to  do  was  to  speak,  not  to  act. 


APPENDIX   C 

THE   ELAINE    CAMPAIGN 

In  "The  House  of  Harper,"  written  by  J.  Henry  Harper,  the 
following  passage  occurs:  " Curtis  returned  from  the  convention 
in  company  with  young  Theodore  Roosevelt  and  they  discussed 
the  situation  thoroughly  on  their  trip  to  New  York  and  came  to 
the  conclusion  that  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  coniistently  sup 
port  Elaine.  Roosevelt,  however,  had  a  conference  afterward 
with  Senator  Lodge  and  eventually  fell  in  line  behind  Elaine. 
Curtis  came  to  our  office  and  found  that  we  were  unanimously 
opposed  to  the  support  of  Elaine,  and  with  a  hearty,  good-will  he 
trained  his  editorial  guns  on  the  *  Plumed  Knight*  of  Mulligan 
letter  fame.  His  work  was  as  effective  and  deadly  as  any  fight  he 
ever  conducted  in  the  Weekly."  This  statement  has  no  founda 
tion  whatever  in  fact.  I  did  not  return  from  the  convention  in 
company  with  Mr.  Curtis.  He  went  back  to  New  York  from  the 
convention,  whereas  I  went  to  my  ranch  in  North  Dakota.  No 
such  conversation  as  that  ever  took  place  between  me  and  Mr. 
Curtis.  In  my  presence,  in  speaking  to  a  number  of  men  at  the 
time  in  Chicago,  Mr.  Curtis  said:  "You  younger  men  can,  if  you 
think  right,  refuse  to  support  Mr.  Elaine,  but  I  am  too  old  a 
Republican,  and  have  too  long  been  associated  with  the  party,  to 
break  with  it  now."  Not  only  did  I  never  entertain  after  the 
convention,  but  I  never,  during  the  convention  or  at  any  other 
time,  entertained  the  intention  alleged  in  the  quotation  in  ques 
tion.  I  discussed  the  whole  situation  with  Mr.  Lodge  before  going 
to  the  convention,  and  we  had  made  up  our  minds  that  if  the 
nomination  of  Mr.  Elaine  was  fairly  made  we  would  with  equal 
good  faith  support  him. 


INDEX 


Abbott,  Lyman,  254 
Abernathy,  John,  46 
Addaras,  Jane,   163 
Africa,  Hunting  in,  34,  35 
Ahlwardt,     Rector,     an     anti-Semitic 

preacher,  186,  187 
Alaska,  enactment  of  game  laws  for, 

421 
Alcott,  Louisa  M.,  reading  of  books 

by,  16 
Aldermen,     deprived     of     confirming 

power,  in  New  York  City,  82,  83 
Aldrich,  Senator,  351,  352,  435,  436 
Alger,  Russell  A.,  218,  219,  224,  226; 

letter  from,  relating  to  round  robin 

incident,  256,  257 
Allison  amendment  to  Hepburn  Bill, 

437 

American  Tobacco  Company  suit,  430 
Ames,  General,  246,  247 
Anarchists,  treatment  due,  491 
Animal     pets    of    author's    children, 

340-343 
Animals,    seen   in   Yellowstone   Park, 

320;     measures    taken    by    author 

while  President,  to  protect,  420-422 
Annapolis  Naval  Academy,  208 
Anthracite  coal  strike,  464-478 
Anthracite    Strike    Commission,    466- 

469,  474-476 
Antin,  Mary,  163 
Appalachian  National  Forest,  400 
Architecture,     improvement     in,     in 

Washington,  420 
Arizona,  strike  riots  in,  494 
Armaments  as  insurance  against  war, 

204,  532-538 
Armenian    massacres,    lesson    to    be 

drawn  from,  534 
Army,     condition     of     American,     at 

opening  of  Spanish  War,  217,  221- 

224;    training   in,   for   actual   war, 

228-230;    lessons   learned  by,  from 

Spanish  War,  254,  255 
Army  officers,  physical  tests  for,  46- 

49* 

Asiatic  laborers  in  California,  treat 
ment  of  question  of,  377-380 


Assembly,  election  of  author  to  the, 

63;  experiences  in  the,  63-92 
Austen,  Jane,  novels  of,  336 
Australia,  visit  of  American  fleet  to, 
553 

Bacon,  Robert,  45,  357,  410,  468 

Bailey,  L.  H.,  413 

Baird,  Spencer,  publications  of,  18 

Baldwin,  General,  494 

Ballads,  author's  fondness  for,  335, 
336 

Ballantyne,  R.  M.,  stories  by,  16 

Ballinger  case,  the,  363,  364 

Banks,  Lewis  A.,  447 

Barber,  Captain  H.  A.,  letter  by,  265, 
266 

Bardshar,  H.  P.,  letter  by,  264,  265 

Barrett,  C.  S.,  413 

Barry,  General  T.  H.,  45,  505 

Bates,  General,  247 

Battle  fleet,  cruise  of,  around  the 
world,  548-559 

Battle-ships,  building  of  our  new,  207, 
208;  color  of,  556 

Bear-hunters'  dinner,  White  House, 
321 

Bear  hunting,  35-39 

Bede,  Congressman,  406 

Bell,  General,  47 

Bell,  taxidermist,  17  ' 

Belmont,   August,   30 

Beveridge,  Senator,  353 

Bicycle  police,  New  York,  182-184 

Big  business,  combination  between 
politics  and,  75-77;  alliance  of 
New  York  Republican  machine  and, 
under  Platt  rule,  273-279;  opposi 
tion  of,  to  author's  candidacy  in 
1904,  386,  387;  National  control 
of,  423-438,  443-460,  560  ff. 

Big-game  hunting,   34-36 

Big-game  library,  Sagamore  Hill,  333 

"Big  stick,"  use  of,  in  connection 
with  control  of  corporations,  423- 
438 

Big  trees  of  California,  321 


585 


586 


INDEX 


Billy  the  Kid,  New  Mexico  desperado, 
118 

Bird  Reservations,  National,  estab 
lishment  of,  422 

Birds,  early  study  of,  19;  at  Saga 
more  Hill,  318-320,  326-328;  in 
Virginia,  320;  in  Yellowstone  Park, 
321;  in  the  Yosemite,  322;  in  Eng 
land,  322-326 

Bishop,  Joseph  B.,  316;  "The  Panama 
Gateway"  by,  531 

Black,  Governor  Frank,  270,  271 

Blackbirds  in  England,  324 

Blackcap  warblers,  325 

Black  horse  cavalry,  New  York  Leg 
islature,  70-73 

Blackmailing  bills,  New  York  Legis 
lature,  69  ff. 

Blaine,  James  G.,  86 

Boating,  views  on,  40 

Bonaparte,  Attorney  -  General,  430, 
438-441,  444;  letter  to,  on  actions 
of  trusts  and  corporations,  450-460 

Books,  author's,  as  a  boy,  14-17;  for 
children,  15,  345,  346;  gratification 
of  love  of,  318;  collection  of,  at 
Sagamore  Hill,  332  ff.;  for  states 
men's  reading,  333,  334;  remarks 
on  lists  of  best  books,  334 

Bordeaux,  Henry,  writings  of,  163 

Boss,  distinction  between  a  leader 
and  a,  148-152 

Boss  rule  in  New  York  State,  273- 
279 

Boughton,  Captain,  243 

Bourke,  Edward  J.,  192-194 

Boxing,  lessons  in,  28;  later  experi 
ences  in,  40,  41;  as  a  first-class 
sport,  41,  42 

Brace,  Charles  Loring,  10 

Brady,  Governor  of  Alaska,  10 

Briesen,  Arthur  von,  63 

Bristow,  Joseph  L.,  investigation  of 
Post-Office  Department  by,  370 

Brodie,  Major,  236,  238 

Bronzes  at  Sagamore  Hill,  329,  330 

Brooks,  John  Graham,  "American 
Syndicalism"  by,  500 

Brownson,  Admiral,  210 

Bryan,  William  J.,  269,  273 

Bryce,  James,  anecdote  incorporated 
in  "American  Commonwealth"  by, 
89;  a  Westerner  at  dinner  with, 
119;  letter  from,  on  author's  resig 
nation  of  Police  Commissionership, 


202;  tribute  by,  to  the  men  who 
worked  with  author  while  Presi 
dent,  355,  356 

Buchanan,  James,  362 

Buchanan-Taft  theory  of  Presidential 
office,  363-365 

Buck  fever,  32,  33 

Buddha,  statue  of,  presented  by  Dalai 
Lama,  331 

Buffalo,  the  African,  34;  measures 
for  preservation  of  American,  421 

Bull-fighting,  boxing  contrasted  with, 
42 

Bulloch,  Anna,  12 

Bulloch,  Archibald,  4 

Bulloch,  Irvine,  12 

Bulloch,  James  Dnnwoodie,  12,  13 

Bulloch,  Martha,  mother  of  author,  11 

Bullock,  Seth,  45,  46,  125,  347;  first 
meeting  and  later  close  friendship 
with,  117,  118 

Bunau-Varilla,  Philippe,  524 

Burley,  John  W.,  negro  criminal,  374 

Burns,  William  J.,  372 

Burroughs,  John,  115,  320;  with  the 
author  in  Yellowstone  Park,  320, 
322 

Burton,  Senator,  373 

Business,  combination  between  poli 
tics  and,  75-77.  See  also  Big  busi 
ness 

Butterfield,  Kenyon,  413 

Calahan  saloon  affair,  193,  194 
California,  visit  to,  321,  322;  trouble 

relative  to  Japanese  in,  377-383 
Canals,    action    in    regard    to    New 

York,  284-286 
Cannon,  Joseph,  351,  352 
Capital  punishment,  views  on,  248 
Capron,  Allyn,  248 
Carter,  "Modesty,"  110 
Cartoon,  "His  Favorite  Author,"  390 
Chaffee,  General,  222,  235,  239,  247 
Chapin,  Alfred  C.,  67,  68,  76 
Chapman,  Frank,  23 
Chestnut  trees,  Sagamore  Hill,  327 
Chicago  Convention  of   1912,  95,  108 
Chidwick,  Father,  naval  chaplain,  42 
Child  Labor  Committee,  National,  462 
Children,  the  bearing  and  rearing  of, 
162    ff.;    pleasure   to   be  found    in, 
336,  337;  anecdotes  of  the  author's, 
337-345;  education  and  reading  of, 
345,  346 


INDEX 


587 


Children's  books,  15-17,  345,  346 

Chimney  Butte  ranch,  93,  94  ff. 

China,  fatuousness  of  disarmament 
illustrated  by,  384,  535 

Cigar-Makers'  Union  bill  in  New  York 
Assembly,  79-81 

Civil  Service  Commission,  efficiency 
of,  as  conducted  by  Garfield,  Mc- 
Ilhenny,  and  similar  men,  368 

Civil  Service  Commissioner,  author's 
work  as,  129  ff. 

Civil  Service  Reform,  discussion  of, 
129-134 

Clark,  E.  E.,  469 

Clark,  Inter-State  Commerce  Commis 
sioner,  437 

Clark,  Senator  from  Arkansas,  353, 
510 

Class  war,  483 

Cleveland,  Grover,  73,  80,  467;  letter 
from,  during  coal  strike  of  1902, 
473,  474 

Coal  lands,  withdrawal  of,  361,  407, 
413 

Coal  miners'  strike,  464-478 

Cockrell,  Senator,  135,  353 

Coinage,  new  designs  in,  420 

Colombia,  behavior  of,  relative  to 
Panama  Canal,  513-527;  text  of 
proposed  message  to  Congress  con 
cerning,  530,  531;  case  of  Vene 
zuela  contrasted  with  that  of,  531 

Colton,  administration  of  Santo  Do- 
mingan  customs  by,  505 

Comer,  Cornelia,  "Preliminaries"  by, 
163 

Commerce  and  Labor,  Department  of, 
431 

Commerce  Court,  the,  437 

Commissioners,  creation  of  volunteer 
unpaid,  365-369;  abandonment  of, 
by  President  Taft,  369 

Gone,  Lieutenant-Commander  H.  I., 
552 

Conservation  of  natural  resources, 
measures  looking  to,  in  New  York 
State,  290,  313-315;  national,  393- 
422;  outgrowth  of  movement  from 
the  forest  movement,  407;  confer 
ences  of  Governors  and  of  nations 
on,  409,  410 

Constant,  M.  d'Estournelles  de,  538, 
544 

Cooley,  Alford,  287,  302,  359 

Cooper,  Congressman,  353 


Corporations,  regulation  of,  297-304, 
423-438,  443-460,  560  ff. ;  control  of, 
and  President  Wilson's  "New  Free 
dom,"  574-582 
Corporations,    Bureau    of,    work    of, 

417-419,  432 

Corruption,  in  New  York  Legislature, 
68  ff.;  in  New  York  Police  Depart 
ment,  175;  in  Federal  Post-Office 
Department,  370-372;  in  the  Land 
Office,  372,  373 

Cortelyou,  Secretary,  431,  445 
Costello,  Michael,  65,  71,  72 
Costigan,  Tammany  politician,  142 
Cougar,  bronze,  gift  from  the  Tennis 

Cabinet,  46,  330 
Country    Life,    Commission    on,    368, 

414-416 

Courts,  doubtful  decisions  by,  81,  82; 
tendency  of,  to  protect  those  least 
in  need  of  protection,  463;  miscar 
riage  of  justice  in,  565 
Cousins,  the  sixteen,  336 
Cove  School,  Oyster  Bay,  13,  344 
Cowboys,   life  among  the,  93   ff.;    in 
Rough    Rider    regiment,    120,    123- 

126,  227,  228 
Cowles,  Captain,  210,  329 
Crater  Lake  Park,  Oregon,  420 
Crime,  decrease  in,  in  New  York  City, 

during   author's    regime    as    Police 
Commissioner,  176 
Criminals,     public    attitude    toward, 

127,  128;    pardoning    of,    304-307, 
447  ff. 

Croker,  Richard,  190,  272 

Croly,  Herbert,  "Promise  of  Ameri 
can  Life"  by,  25;  cited,  77 

Cuba,  distressing  conditions  in,  be 
fore  Spanish  War,  208,  209;  fight 
ing  in,  234-268;  honorable  policy 
followed  concerning,  after  Spanish 
War,  504,  505 

Cunningham,  newspaper  man,  90 

Curran,  Father,  469 

Curtis,  General,  Assemblyman,  65 

Cutler,  Arthur,  21,  22 

Daniels,  Ben,  45 

Dargan,  Congressman,  135 

Davis,  Arthur  P.,  397 

Davis,  Cushman  K.,  135;  letter  from, 
quoted,  209  n.;  address  on  corpora 
tions  by,  567-569 


588 


INDEX 


Davis,  Richard  Harding,  in  Cuba  with 
the  Rough  Riders,  237,  249 

Debates  and  debating  societies,  lack  of 
sympathy  with,  22,  23 

Debs,  Eugene,  488,  489 

Demagogues  and  demagogy,  90-92 

Denison,  Assistant  District  Attorney, 
373,  446 

Denison,  of  Japanese  Foreign  Office, 
554 

Departmental  Methods,  Commission 
on,  366,  367 

Desperadoes,  experiences  with  West 
ern,  120-123;  adventures  of  New 
York  police  with,  178-182 

Devery,  William  F.,  310-312 

Dewey,  Admiral,  210-213;  Autobiog 
raphy  of,  quoted,  213,  214 

Dime  novels,  reading  of,  15 

Diplomatic  service  of  United  States, 
356,  357 

Disarmament,  fallacies  of,  384,  533- 
637 

District  of  Columbia,  regulation  of 
shooting  in  the,  421 

Dixon,  Senator,  353 

Dodge,  Cleveland  H.,  174 

Dolliver,  Senator,  353,  435,  437 

Donovan,  Mike,  43 

Dow,  William,  30,  31,  78;  at  the  Elk- 
horn  ranch,  95,  97 

Doyle,  Father,  307 

Dutch  ancestors  of  author,  1,  2 

Earle,  Edwin,  446 

Economic  conditions,  duty  of  Govern 
ment  concerning,  158-161 

Editors,  newspaper,  criticism  of,  147; 
ia  the  pay  of  Wall  Street  interests, 
451-455.  See  Newspapers 

Edmunds,  George  F.,  86 

Education  of  author's  children,  345 

Edwards,  Jonathan,  2 

Egan,  Ambassador,  357 

Egypt,  boyhood  study  of  ornithology 
in,  19 

Eight-hour  law,  461,  462 

El  Caney,  fight  at,  240 

Elephant  hunting,  34 

Elkhorn  ranch,  93,  95  ff. 

Elsberg,  Nathaniel,  287 

Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo,  in  California, 
321 

England,    friendly    attitude    of,    in 


Spanish   War,  217;    a  day  among 

the  birds  of,  322-326 
European  trips,  13,  19-21 
Evans,  Admiral  Robley  D.,  210,  329, 

550 
Evening    Post,    New    York,    on    the 

Rough  Riders,  228  n. 
Examinations,   competitive,   for   Civil 

Service  positions,  143-145 
Executive,  the,  view  of,  as  peculiarly 

representative  of  the  people  as   a 

whole,  282 
Executive  power,  author's  broadening 

of  use  of,  357-366 
Exercise,    a    necessity    for    men    in 

sedentary  pursuits,   39;    forms   of, 

taken    by    author,    39-41,    45;     in 

walking  and  riding,  prescribed  for 

army  officers,  46-50;  desirability  of, 

for  all  city-dwellers,  50 

Fearlessness,  acquisition  of  quality 
of,  62,  53 

Ferris,  Joseph  A.,  94,  95,  114 

Ferris,  Sylvanus  M.,  94,  95,  105-107, 
118 

Fine  Arts  Council,  420 

Fire  prevention  work  of  Forest  Serv 
ice,  405 

Fish,  Hamilton,  359 

Fitzsimmons,  Bob,  43,  44,  174 

Fleet,  the,  world  voyage  of,  548-559 

Flowers  at  Sagamore  Hill,  319 

Foreign  affairs,  conduct  of,  during 
Presidency  of  author,  384,  385 

Foreign  policy,  in  case  of  Santo  Do 
mingo,  507-511;  settlement  of 
trouble  between  Venezuela  and  Ger 
many,  512;  concerning  Colombia 
and  the  Panama  Canal,  512-531 

Forest  Congress,  First  National,  401 

Forest  preservation  in  New  York 
State,  290,  313-315 

Forests,  national  conservation  of,  393 
if.,  399-401,  403  ff. 

Forest  Service,  educational  work  of 
the,  400,  401;  placing  of  National 
Forests  under  care  of,  401 ;  strength 
of  hostility  to,  404;  water-policy 
established  by,  406;  suits  brought 
against,  407 

Fortnightly  Review,  quoted  concern 
ing  men  who  worked  with  author 
while  President,  356 

Fox,  lawyer,  286 


INDEX 


589 


France,  gift  to  author  from,  after 
peace  of  Portsmouth,  543,  544 

Franchi&e  taxation  in  New  York 
State,  298  ff. 

Frankfurter,  Assistant  District  Attor 
ney,  373,  446 

Frauds  in  public  lands,  372,  373 

Free  silver  platform,  Bryan's,  273 

Frick,  H.  C.,  438-442,  562 

Fulton,  Senator,  359,  360,  404 

Gallantry  among  New  York  police, 
recognition  of,  175-186 

Game  laws,  enactment  of,  421 

Garfield,  James  R.,  45,  368,  410,  413, 
432,  450;  able  administration  of 
Interior  Department  by,  412 

Garrett,  Patrick,  118 

Gary,  E.  H.,  438-443,  560-562 

Gerbracht,  Ernest  W.,  447 

Germany,  boyhood  days  in,  20,  21 ;  aid 
of,  in  negotiations  looking  to  settle 
ment  of  Russo-Japanese  War,  543 

Gladstone,  James  Bulloch's  views  con 
cerning,  13 

Goddard,  F.  Norton,  315 

Godkin,  E.  L.,  202 

Goethals,  Colonel  G.  W.,  528 

Goff,  John,  39,  114 

Goldfield  mining  difficulties,  376,  377 

Gompers,  Samuel,  481 

Goodrich,  David,  244,  248 

Gorgas,  Dr.,  528 

Gorman,  Senator,  138,  139 

Governors,  conference  of,  at  White 
House,  409 

Governorship  of  New  York,  election 
to  and  activities  during,  269-317 

Grand  Cafion  Game  Preserve,  421 

Gray,  Judge  George,  comment  on 
author's  action  during  coal  strike, 
476  n. 

Greenway,  Jack,  244,  248,  251 

Grey,  Sir  Edward,  322 

Grizzly  bear,  hunting  the,  34,   35-39 

Grosvenor,  Congressman,  136,  137 

Guasimas,  battle  of,  235-242 

Hague  conference  on  conservation, 
proposed,  410 

Hague  Court,  carrying  of  cases  be 
fore  the,  512,  538,  539 

Hale,  Senator,  351,  352,  369,  416 

Half-breed  faction  of  Republican 
party,  68,  85,  86 


Hamilton,  Alexander,  admiration  for, 

65 
Hampton    Roads,    arrival    of    battle 

fleet  at,  after  world  cruise,  557-559 
Hanna,  Mark,  153-155,  308,  309 
Harriman  railway  corporations,  suits 

against  the,  444 
Harris,  Joel  Chandler,  321 
Harvard,  life  at,  22-26 
Havemeyer,  Henry  0.,  447 
Havemeyer   &   Elder    Sugar   Refinery 

frauds,  445-447 

Hawaii,  bird  reservations  in,  422 
Hawkins,  General,  222,  243 
Hay,    John,    letters    from,    272,    385; 

cordial    relations    with,    384,    385; 

mentioned,  521;  quoted  on  author's 

action  in  the  Panama  matter,  526 
Hay-Herran  Treaty,  513,  520 
Hay-Pauncefote  Treaty,  512,  519 
Hayes,  Johnny,  50 
Haywood,  376,  488-490 
Hazel,  Judge,  270 
Heike,  Charles  R.,  447;  commutation 

of  sentence  of,  448 

Heney,  Francis,  359,  360,  372,  373,  411 
Hepburn,  Congressman,  341,  353 
Hepburn  Rate  Bill,  435-437 
Herrig,  Fred,  123 
Hess,  Jake,  57,  59,  60 
Heyer,  New  York  policeman,  182 
Hill,  David  B.,  68,  190,  193,  278,  297, 

304 

Hill,  Professor  A.  S.,  22 
"History  of  the  Naval  War  of  1812," 

22,  205 
Hitchcock,  Secretary  of  the  Interior, 

400,  411 

Hitt,  Representative,  353 
"Homes  Without  Hands,"  Wood's,  17 
Hook,  Judge,  quoted,  569 
Hooker,  Elon,  285,  286 
Hornaday,  W.  T.,  23 
Horseback-riding,  29,  30;  as  physical 

test  for  officers,  46,  47 
Hough,  Judge,  359 
Howe,  Walter,  65 
Howze,    Lieutenant    Robert    L.,    243, 

249;  letters  by,  260,  261 
Hubbard,  Commander,  522 
Hughes,  Governor,  277,  296 
Humphrey,  Captain,  522 
Hunt,  Isaac,  65 
Hunt,  Jap,  111,  112 
Hunting  experiences,  32-39 


590 


INDEX 


Indian  timber-lands,  proper  handling 
of,  405 

Indians,  difficulties  with,  in  the  West, 
110-113;  incident  of  Senator  Quay 
and,  165-157;  safeguarding  welfare 
of,  361,  362 

Individualism,  limitations  to,  159, 
160 

Industrial  conditions,  Governmental 
oversight  of,  158-161 

Inland  Waterways,  Commission  on, 
368,  407,  408;  trip  of,  down  Mis 
sissippi  River,  408 

Insurance  business,  correction  of  evils 
in,  294-296 

Internal  affairs,  author's  scheme  of 
administration  of,  while  President, 
384,  385 

Inter-State  Commerce  Commission, 
strengthening  of,  by  Hepburn  Rate 
Act,  435-438 ;  mutual  obligations  of 
corporations  and,  437 

Italian,  translation  of  "The  Strenu 
ous  Life"  into,  50 

Itchen,  birds  in  valley  of  the,  323 

Jackson-Lincoln  theory  of  the  Presi 
dency,  362-365,  464 

James  River  Dam  Bill,  veto  of,  418 

Japan,  friendliness  of,  in  Spanish 
War,  217;  feeling  in,  on  settlement 
of  Russo-Japanese  War,  542;  recep 
tion  given  American  fleet  in,  553- 
555^ 

Japanese,  translation  of  "The  Strenu 
ous  Life"  into,  50 

Japanese  in  California,  difficulties 
over,  377-384 

Jenkins,  M.  J.,  letter  by,  264 

Jew-baiting  preacher,  story  of  the, 
186,  187 

Jiu-jitsu,  41 

Joint  Conservation  Conference,  409, 
410 

Jones,  Sheriff  Bill,  115-118 

Jusserand,  Ambassador,  anecdote  con 
cerning,  45 

Keep,  Charles  H.,  366 
Kellogg,  Frank  B.,  373,  572 
Kellor,  Frances,  163 
Kelly,  Luther,  45,  46 
Kelly,  Peter,  65-68 
Kent,  General,  247 


Kettle  Hill,  the  fight  at,  237,  260,  262, 
264,  265,  267,  268 

Klamath  Lake,  Oregon,  bird  reserva 
tion  at,  422 

Knight  Company  case,  427-430,  450 

Knox,  Attorney-General,  428 

Kohrs,  Conrad,  109 

Kruse,  Assemblyman  and  judge,  65 

Labor,  work  in  the  interests  of,  461- 
499 

Labor-saving  machinery,  worker's 
right  to  share  in  profits  of,  485 

Labor  unions,  attitude  toward,  201, 
472,  478-483 

La  Follette,  quoted  on  author's  serv 
ices  as  President,  391,  392 

Lambert,  Dr.  Alexander,  346 

Land  fraud  prosecutions,  372,  373, 
411 

Lane,  Inter-State  Commerce  Commis 
sioner,  437 

Larks,  in  England,  325 

Law,  study  of,  and  remarks  on,  54 

Lawton,  General,  222,  239 

Lee,  Arthur,  197,  248,  249 

Leonard,  Captain,  47 

Leupp,  Francis  E.,  361,  362 

Lewi,  Dr.  Maurice,  188 

Lion  hunting,  34 

Littledale,  St.  George,  46 

Little  Missouri,  life  on  the,  93-123 

Llewellyn,  Major,  124 

Lodge,  Henry  Cabot,  134,  511;  efforts 
of,  in  securing  author's  appoint 
ment  as  Assistant  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  204;  fearlessness  of,  in  up 
holding  national  honor  and  inter 
est,  210;  cooperation  of,  with  au 
thor,  before  Spanish  War,  213; 
close  relations  with,  upon  author's 
becoming  President,  352,  353 

Loeb,  William,  Jr.,  295,  296,  349,  444- 
446,  545 

Long,  John,  boxing-master,  28 

Lorimer,  Senator,  152 

Louisville  and  Nashville  Railroad 
trouble,  496-498 

Low,  Seth.  543 

Ludlow,  General,  247 

McBee,  Silas,  316 
McCall,  John  A.,  294-296 
McCullagh,  John,  Chief  of  New  York 
State  Bureau  of  Elections,  310,  311 


INDEX 


591 


McCullough,  John,  police  inspector, 
187 

MacFarlane,  Federal  District  Attor 
ney,  286 

McGee,  W.  J.,  394 

Mcllhenny,  John,  368 

McKinley,  William,  135,  154,  204, 
505;  death  of,  349 

Machine,  the  Republican,  in  New 
York  State,  274-279 

Machinery,  labor-saving,  485 

Machines,  distinction  between  organ 
izations  and,  148-152 

Mahan,  Captain,  writings  of,  207 

Maine,  blowing  up  of  the,  212 

Maine  woods,  camping  and  hunting  in 
the,  30 

Malheur  Lake,  Oregon,  bird  reserva 
tion  at,  422 

Marksmanship,  degrees  of,  31,  32; 
training  of  New  York  police  in, 
180;  in  the  navy,  212 

Maroquin,  J.  M.,  Colombian  dictator, 
518-521 

Marriage,  remarks  on,  55,  161-167; 
advantage  of  early,  197 

Marryat,  "Midshipman  Easy"  by,  16; 
a  lesson  from,  52 

Marshall,  body-servant,  240 

Marshall,  Vice-President,  reported 
statement  of,  concerning  author  and 
battle  of  San  Juan  Hill,  257,  258 

"Marxism  versus  Socialism,"  Simkho- 
vitch's,  500,  501 

Maxwell,  G.  H.,  393 

Mayoralty  campaign  (1886),  129 

Meat  inspection  law,  443 

Merriam,  Hart,  23,  24 

Merrifield,  William  J.,  94,  95,  105, 
106,  114 

Mesa  Verde  National  Park,  420 

Meyer,  George,  95,  106-108 

Meyer,  George  von  L.,  357,  543 

Miles,  General,  232 

Miller,  printer,  case  of,  481,  482 

Millet,  Frank,  420 

Mills,  Lieutenant  A.  L.,  240,  241, 
249;  letter  by,  261,  262 

Minckwitz  family,  Dresden,  20,  21 

Mineral  land  laws,  412 

Mines,  Bureau  of,  462 

Mississippi  River,  trip  of  Inland 
Waterways  Commission  down  the, 
408 

Mitchell,  John,  466,  467,  543 


Mitchell,  Senator,  411 

Mondell,  Congressman,  363,  396 

Monroe  Doctrine,  author's  interpreta 
tion  of  the,  506;  application  of,  in 
cases  of  Venezuela,  Santo  Domingo, 
and  Colombia  and  Panama,  506-531 

Montauk  Point,  return  of  Cuban  army 
to,  253 

Moody,  Attorney-General,  430,  437, 
444,  450,  463 

Moosehead  Lake,  trip  to,  27 

Morgan,  John,  209,  210 

Morley,  John,  495,  496 

Morse,  banker,  case  of,  373,  447,  448 

Morton,  Captain,  243 

Morton,  Paul,  434,  435 

Morton  Hall,  political  meeting-place, 
56,  57,  61 

Moseley,  Edward  A.,  469 

Mosquito  Inlet  Reservation,  422 

Mounted  police,  New  York,  182 

Mount  Olympus  National  Monument, 
421 

Moyer,  376,  488-490 

"Mr.  Dooley,"  cited,  214 

Muir,  John,  visit  to  the  Yosemite 
with,  321,  322 

Muir  Woods,  421 

Murdock,  Congressman,  353 

Murphy,  Lieutenant,  522 

Murray,  Joseph,  57-63,  146 

Murray,  Lawrence,  377 

National  Association  of  Manufac 
turers,  491 

National  Bird  Reservations,  422 
National  Bison  Range,  Montana,  421 
National  Child  Labor  Committee,  462 
National     Conservation,     Commission 

on,  368,  407-410 

National    Guard    of   New   York,    au 
thor's  service  in,  229 
National  Guard  training,  advantages 

and  shortcomings  of,  229,  230 
National  Monuments  Act,  421 
National  Parks,  creation  of,  420 
Navy,  appointment  of  author  to  As 
sistant   Secretaryship   of,   204;    be 
ginnings  of  our  new,  207 ;  condition 
of,  before  opening  of  Spanish  War, 
207,   208;    preparation   of,   for   the 
war,   210-216;    lessons   learned   by, 
from  the  war,  254 ;  benefits  to,  from 
world  cruise  of  fleet,  548 
Neill,  Charles  P.,  377,  462,  469 


592 


INDEX 


Nelson,  Battling,  43 

Nevada,  checking  of  anarchy  in,  376, 
377 

Newbold,  Thomas,  65 

Newell,  Frederick  H.,  290,  393,  394, 
397,  398 ;  single-minded  devotion  of, 
to  work  of  reclamation,  397 

New  Forest,  visit  to  the,  323,  324 

"New  Freedom,"  President  Wilson's, 
423,  574-582 

Newlands,  Senator  Francis  G.,  393 

Newsboys'  Lodging-House,  10 

Newspaper  correspondents,  h«lp  of,  at 
Albany,  90;  tribute  to  quality  and 
services  of,  at  Washington,  354 

Newspapers,  criticism  of  attitude  of 
certain,  147 ;  deprecation  of  Span 
ish  War  by,  209;  hostility  of,  to 
author  in  campaign  of  1904,  387; 
support  given  to  corporations  by, 
425,  451-455;  attacks  by,  due  to 
author's  action  in  Anthracite  Strike, 
478;  attack  by,  following  speech 
condemning  anarchistic  labor 
leaders  and  capitalists  alike,  487; 
denunciation  by,  owing  to  course  in 
Santo  Domingan  trouble,  509,  510; 
attitude  of,  toward  world  cruise  of 
battle  fleet,  552 

New  York  City,  boyhood  homes  in, 
5,  6,  9;  Police  Commissionership  of, 
168;  prevention  of  election  frauds 
in,  in  1900,  310-312 

Niedicke,  Paul,  46 

Nile,  bird-collecting  on  the,  19 

Nobel  Peace  Prize,  543 

Norris,  Kathleen,  "Mother"  by,  163, 
166 

North  American  Conservation  Con 
ference,  410 

Northern  Securities  Company  case, 
428-430,  450 

Odell,  B.  B.,  270,  359 

Office-holders,  use  of,  to  debauch  po 
litical  conventions,  131 

Offices,  Government,  use  of,  as  patron 
age,  131  ff. 

Officers,  riding  and  walking  tests  for, 
46-50 

Oklahoma,  protection  of  Indian  rights 
and  property  in,  361,  362 

O'Neil,  Bucky,  248 

O'Neill,  William,  64,  65,  78 


Oregon   land   fraud   cases,   372,    373, 

411 

Organization    of    Government    Scien 
tific  Work,  Commission  on,  366 
Ornithological  studies,  19,  20 
Ouida,  "Under  Two  Flags"  by,  15 
Our  Young  Folks,  15,  16,  25 
Oyster    Bay,    residence   at,   21.      8ee 
Sagamore  Hill 

Packing-house  inspection,  443 

Palestine,  bird-collecting  in,  19 

Palisade  Park  Commission,  297 

Panama,  Republic  of,  recognition  of, 
by  United  States,  524 

Panama  Canal,  history  of  period  pre 
liminary  to  building,  512-527;  de 
cision  of  kind  of  canal  and  work  of 
building,  527-529 

Panama  Canal  tolls,  a  matter  for  ar 
bitration,  539 

Panama  Canal  Zone,  acquisition  of, 
477;  history  of  steps  leading  to 
acquisition  of,  512  ff. 

"Panama  Gateway,"  Bishop's,  531 

Panama  revolution,  521-526 

Panic  of  1907,  438-443,  477 

Pardoning  of  criminals,  304-307, 447  fif. 

Parker,  Alton  B.,  269,  387 

Parker,  Lieutenant,  249 

Parr,  Richard,  444-446 

Partridge,  Colonel,  285,  286 

Peace-at-any-price  people,  remarks  on, 
204  ff.,  213,  254,  532-538 

Pelican  Island  rookery,  422 

Perkins,  George  W.,  first  meeting 
with,  294-296;  service  on  Palisade 
Park  Commission,  297;  mentioned, 
468 

Pettibone,  376,  488 

Petty,  New  York  police  sergeant,  180 

Phi  Beta  Kappa  Society,  Harvard,  23 

Philadelphia  Convention  of  1900,  308, 
309 

Philippine  policy,  502-504 

Pinchot,  Gifford,  45,  290,  393,  394, 
396,  399,  401,  404,  410,  413,  450; 
volunteer  commissions  suggested  by, 
368;  invaluable  work  of,  as  head 
of  Forestry  Bureau,  394;  chairman 
of  National  Conservation  Commis 
sion,  409 

Pinnacles,  National  Monument  in 
California,  421 


INDEX 


593 


Pistol  practice  by  New  York  police, 
180 

Platt,  Orville  H.,  135,  353 

Platt,  T.  P.,  269-272;  position  of,  as 
a  boss,  274-278;  character  of  op 
position  to,  279;  examples  of  the 
rule  of,  284  ff.;  custom  of  break 
fasting  with,  288;  struggle  with, 
over  office  of  Superintendent  of  In 
surance,  290-293;  clash  with,  on 
franchise  taxation,  297-303;  suc 
ceeds  in  nominating  author  for  the 
Vice-Presidency,  308,  309 

Platt  National  Park,  Oklahoma,  420 

Plunkett,  Sir  Horace,  413 

Poetry,  reading  of,  16 

Police  Commissioner,  service  as,  168  ff. 

Police  lodging-houses,  abolition  of, 
199 

Police,  New  York  City,  168-203 

Politics,  should  not  be  one's  sole  ca 
reer,  55;  author's  early  experiences 
in,  55-68;  improvement  in,  68;  ex 
periences  in  practical,  in  New  York 
Legislature,  68-92 

Polo-playing,  39,  40 

Portsmouth,  peace  of,  541-544 

Post,  Reginald,  287,  302 

Post- Office  Department,  investigation 
of,  370 

Powell,  Major  John  Wesley,  393 

Prairie  fires,  108,  109 

Presidency,  succession  of  author  to  the, 
349;  Jackson-Lincoln  theory  of,  vs. 
Buchanan-Taft  theory,  362-365,  464; 
views  as  to  three  terms  in  the,  387- 
390 

Price,  Overton  W.,  367,  405 

Prize-fighting,  41-44 

Proctor,  John  R.,  129 

Proctor,  Senator,  services  of,  in  se 
curing  Dewey's  appointment,  211 

Progressive  Convention  at  Chicago 
(1912),  95,  108 

Progressive  doctrine,  the,  574-582 

Prostitution,  police  work  dealing 
with,  196  ff. 

Prouty,  Inter-State  Commerce  Com 
missioner,  437,  573 

Pryor,  Dr.  John  H.,  289 

Public  land  policy,  411-413 

Public  Lands  Commission,  368,  411, 
412 

Pure  Food  and  Drugs  Act,  443 

Putnam,  Rufus  P.,  137 


Quaker  strain  in  Roosevelt  ances 
try,  1 

Quay,  Matthew  S.,  pleasant  relations 
of  author  while  President  with, 
155-157;  action  of,  at  time  of  An 
thracite  Strike,  475 

Quigg,  L.  E.,  270-272 

Race,  question  of  perpetuation  of  the, 
161  ff. 

Races,  inadvisability  of  mixing,  378, 
381 

Radclyffe,  Captain,  46 

Railways,  regulation  of,  434-437 

Raines,  John,  303 

Rainey,  Father,  naval  chaplain,  42 

Ranch  life,  93-128 

Raphael,  Otto,  174 

Reading,  as  a  boy,  14-18;  choice  of 
books  for,  332-336;  range  of,  for 
author's  children,  345,  346.  See 
Books 

Rebates,  railway,  434,  435 

Reclamation,  work  of,  394  ff. 

Reclamation  Act,  393,  396-398,  411 

Reed,  T.  B.,  151,  270 

Reformers  of  "silk  stocking"  type,  86, 
87 

Reid,  Mayne,  14-17 

Reid,  New  York  policeman,  181 

Remington,  Frederic,  93,  120 ;  "Bronco 
Buster"  by,  given  to  author,  329 

Republican  Administration,  office 
holders  used  by,  to  debauch  politi 
cal  convention  of  1912,  131 

Republican  party,  position  of,  in 
1898,  273 ;  in  New  York  State,  274- 
280;  at  time  of  author's  succession 
to  Presidency,  350-352 

Revolution  of  Panama  against  Co 
lombia,  521-526 

Revolutions  on  Isthmus  of  Panama, 
514-517 

Reynolds,  James  B.,  289 

Rhinoceros  hunting,  34,  35 

Richards,  Laura  E.,  children's  books 
by,  15,  346 

Rifle  practice  at  Sagamore  Hill, 
author's,  31 

Riis,  Jacob,  42,  63,  192,  289;  author's 
close  association  and  work  with, 
168  ff.,  199,  200;  "How  the  Other 
Half  Lives"  by,  169 

Rixey,  Surgeon-General  P.  M.,  45,  47 

Robb,  Hamden,  65 


594 


INDEX 


Robin,  the  English,  325 

Robinson,  Douglas,  270 

"Robinson  Crusoe/'  reading  of,  16 

Rock  Creek,  walks  down,  45 

Rock  Creek  Park,  family  excursions 
to,  337 

Rockhill,  Ambassador,  357 

Roosevelt,  Isaac,  3 

Roosevelt,  Kermit,  34 

Roosevelt,  Klaes  Martensen  van,  1 

Roosevelt,  Martha  Bulloch,  11 

Roosevelt,  Mrs.  Theodore,  gift  of  sil 
ver  vase  to,  by  men  of  the  Louis 
iana,  329 

Roosevelt,  Robert,  12 

Roosevelt,  Theodore,  father  of  author, 
7-10 

Roosevelt,  Theodore,  ancestry,  1-5; 
birth  of,  5;  childhood,  6  ff.;  father, 
7-10;  mother,  11;  relatives,  12,  13; 
schooling,  13;  early  interest  in  nat 
ural  history,  14,  15,  19-21;  reading 
as  a  child,  15-18;  winter  abroad, 
19-21;  preparation  for  college,  21; 
course  at  Harvard,  22-26;  exercise 
and  sports,  27  ff.;  game  shooting, 
34-39 ;  boxing  and  wrestling,  40-44 ; 
exercise  while  President,  45,  46; 
breaking  into  politics,  55-57;  elec 
tion  to  New  York  Legislature,  63; 
experiences  in  the  Assembly,  63  ff. ; 
defeat  for  nomination  as  Speaker, 
and  beneficial  results,  86,  87 ;  ranch 
life  on  the  Little  Missouri,  93-128; 
unsuccessful  campaign  for  Mayor 
alty  of  New  York  City,  129;  ap 
pointment  and  work  as  Civil  Serv 
ice  Commissioner,  129  ff.;  service 
as  Police  Commissioner  of  New 
York  City,  168-203;  appointment 
to  Assistant  Secretaryship  of  the 
Navy,  204;  preparation  for  the 
Spanish  War,  210  ff.;  appointed 
Lieutenant-Colonel  of  the  Rough 
Riders,  219;  activities  in  getting 
regiment  to  Cuba,  227-233;  the 
fight  at  La  Guasima  and  Kettle 
Hill,  236-241;  battle  of  San  Juan 
Hill,  241-244;  round-robin  incident, 
247,  256;  letters  concerning  share 
in  battle  of  San  Juan  Hill,  256- 
268 ;  election  and  work  as  Governor 
of  New  York,  269  ff. ;  nomination 
to  the  Vice-Presidency,  308;  mes 
sage  giving  views  on  conservation, 


313-315;  residence  at  Sagamore 
Hill,  318  ff.;  study  of  birds  and 
flowers  in  United  States  and  Eng 
land,  319  ff.;  succession  to  the 
Presidency,  349;  broadening  of  use 
of  executive  power,  357  ff. ;  crea 
tion  of  volunteer  unpaid  commis 
sions,  365-369 ;  nomination  and  elec 
tion  to  Presidency  in  1904,  386, 
387;  work  of  conservation  and 
reclamation  of  nation's  natural  re 
sources,  393-422;  regulation  and 
control  of  corporations,  423  ff.; 
Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Company 
case,  439-443;  work  in  behalf  of 
social  and  industrial  justice,  461  ff . ; 
services  in  connection  with  coal 
strike  of  1902,  464-478 ;  attitude  on 
question  of  labor  unions,  471,  472, 
478-482;  views  regarding  Socialism, 
482-486,  500,  501;  difficulties  with 
Western  Federation  of  Miners,  487 
ff.;  views  held  of  Monroe  Doctrine, 
506;  arrangement  of  Santo  Do- 
mingan  trouble,  507-511;  action  in 
regard  to  Colombia  and  the  Pan 
ama  Canal,  512-529;  arbitration  of 
Russo-Japanese  War,  540-543;  proj 
ect  of  world  cruise  of  battle  fleet, 
648-559;  discussion  of  the  trusts, 
the  people,  and  the  square  deal,  560- 
673;  reply  to  attacks  of  President 
Wilson,  574-582 

Roosevelt  Dam,  dedication  of  the,  399 

Roosevelt  family,  the,  1-5,  7-13,  336- 
348 

Roosevelt  Museum  of  Natural  His 
tory,  15,  19 

Root,  Elihu,  562 

Ross,  Professor,  quoted,  448 

Roswell  estate,  4,  5 

Rough  Riders,  the,  120,  123-126;  or 
ganization  of  regiment  called,  218, 
219;  equipping  of,  225-228;  person 
nel  of,  227;  drilling  of,  228-230; 
New  York  Evening  Post  on,  228  n. ; 
activities  of,  in  Spanish  War,  231 
ff. 

Round-robin  incident  at  Santiago,  247, 
256,  257 

Round-up,  description  of,  97-103 

Rowing  as  an  exercise,  40 

Rungius,  Carl,  painting  by,  331 

Runyon,  W.  Cleveland,  on  commuta 
tion  of  sentences  of  criminals,  448 


INDEX 


595 


Russo-Japanese    War,    settlement    of 

the,  540-543 
Ryan,  New  York  policeman,  180,  181 

Sagamore  Hill,  derivation  of  name, 
318;  description  of,  318-320;  birds 
at,  318-320,  326-328;  bronzes  and 
objects  of  interest  at,  329-331; 
books  at,  332-334;  the  children  at, 
336-348 

Saint-Gaudens,  "Puritan"  by,  330; 
new  coinage  designed  by,  420 

Saloons,  regulation  of,  in  New  York, 
189-194 

Sampson,  Admiral,  210 

San  Antonio,  gathering-place  of 
Rough  Riders,  219 

Sanclamente,  M.  A.,  President  of  Co 
lombia,  518,  519 

San  Juan  Hill,  battle  of,  241-244; 
letters  relative  to  author's  part  in 
battle  of,  257-268 

Santiago,  siege  and  surrender  of,  244, 
245 

Santo  Domingo,  settlement  of  diffi 
culties  in,  507-511 

Sargent,  John  S.,  sketches  of  White 
House  by,  332 

Schofield,  General,  474,  475 

Schroeder,  Admiral,  210,  550 

Schurz,  Carl,  letter  to,  545-548 

Scotch  ancestors  of  author,  2,  4 

Selous,  African  hunter,  46,  346 

Sewall,  William,  30,  31,  78;  at  the 
Elkhorn  ranch,  95,  97 

Shafter,  General,  232,  233,  245-247 

Sharp,  Lieutenant-Commander,  234 

Shaw,  Albert,  316 

Sherman  Anti-Trust  Law,  424,  426, 
427,  431,  563  ff. 

Shields,  cowboy-soldier,  250 

Shipp,  Lieutenant  W.  E.,  240 

Shooting,  31 

Simkhovitch,  V.  D.,  "Marxism  versus 
Socialism"  by,  500,  501 

Simpson,  "Hashknife,"  109 

Simpson,  Sloan,  109 

Sims,  Federal  District  Attorney,  373, 
374 

Sims,  Lieutenant,  212 

Smith,  F.  Hopkinson,  sketches  of 
White  House  by,  332 

Smith,  Herbert  Knox,  377,  417-419, 
432,  450 

Snyder,  deputy  sheriff,  116,  117 


Social  conditions,  improvement  of,  as 
a  Government  duty,  158,  159 

Socialism,  Simkhovitch's  book  deal 
ing  with,  500,  501 

Socialist,  terming  of  author  a,  482 

Socialists,  152;  discussion  and  criti 
cism  of  doctrines  of,  482-486 

Spalding,  Bishop,  469 

Spanish  War,  unpreparedness  of 
America  for,  204-208 ;  preparing  the 
navy  for,  210-214;  attitude  of  peo 
ple  in  general  at  beginning  of,  214- 
217;  organization  of  Rough  Riders, 
218,  219;  conditions  in  Navy  and 
War  Departments,  219-225;  equip 
ping  the  Rough  Riders,  225-228; 
embarkation  for  Cuba,  232-234;  the 
Guasimas  fight,  236-240;  battle  of 
San  Juan  Hill,  241-244;  capture  of 
Santiago,  244 ;  round-robin  incident, 
247,  256;  end  of  war  and  disband- 
ment  at  Montauk  Point,  253;  let 
ters  concerning  author's  share  in, 
256-268 

Spectator,  London,  on  world  voyage 
of  American  battle  fleet,  550 

Sperry,  Admiral,  550;  letter  from, 
coneerning  world  cruise  of  battle 
fleet,  554-557 

Spinney,  George,  90 

Spitzer,  dock  superintendent,  446 

Spoils  system,  the,  129  ff. 

Sprague,  Henry,  65 

Spring-Rice,  Cecil,  31 

Square  deal,  in  dealing  with  corpora 
tions,  438  if.,  560  ff. 

Stalwart  faction  of  Republican  partv, 
68,  85 

Standard  Oil  Company,  opposition 
of,  to  legislation  affecting  corpora 
tions,  432 

Standard  Oil  Company  suit,  430 

Steel  Corporation  and  the  Tennessee 
Coal  and  Iron  Company,  439-443, 
560-563 

Steele,  Lieutenant,  253 

Stelzle,  Rev.  Charles,  196 

Sternberg,  Baron  Speck  von,  31 

Stetson,  Francis  Lynde,  76 

Steunenberg,  Governor,  murder  of,  487 

Stevens,  Captain  C.  J.,  260,  267;  let 
ter  by,  263 

Stewart,  Granville,  109 

Stimson,  District  Attorney,  359,  378, 
446,  564 


596 


INDEX 


Stockman's  Association  of  Montana, 
109 

Straus,  Oscar,  431,  450,  543 

"Strenuous  Life,"  speech  and  volume 
of  essays  on,  50 

"Strike"  bills,  in  New  York  Legisla 
ture,  69,  72 

Strong,  Mayor,  168,  169,  270 

Success,  degrees  and  attainment  of, 
51,  52;  highest  type  of,  347 

Suffrage,  universal,  161-167 

Sugar  Trust,  373;  investigation  of 
frauds  perpetrated  by,  444  ff. 

Sugar  Trust  prosecution,  427 

Sullivan,  Big  Tim,  187 

Sullivan,  Jerry  D.,  187 

Sullivan,  John  L.,  44 

Sully  Hill  Park,  420 

Sumner,  General  Samuel  S.,  222,  239- 
241,  243,  247;  letters  by,  260,  266- 
268 

Sun,  New  York,  quoted  on  author's 
position  before  National  Convention 
of  1904,  390  n. 

Sundry  Civil  bill,  416 

Superintendent  of  Insurance,  struggle 
with  Platt  over,  290-293 

Supreme  Court,  upholding  of  execu 
tive  orders  of  author  as  President 
by,  361,  362;  decisions  of,  concern 
ing  control  of  corporations,  426-430; 
occurrence  of  necessity  of  legisla 
tion  by,  567 

"Swiss  Family  Robinson,"  dislike  for, 
16 

Taft,  William  H.,  removal  of  Henry 
White  by,  357;  narrowly  legalistic 
view  of  Presidency  held  by,  363; 
example  of  views  of  power  and 
duties  of  President  found  in  the 
Ballinger  case,  364;  upholding  of 
politicians  against  the  volunteer 
unpaid  commissions  by,  369;  par 
don  by,  of  man  convicted  of  land 
fraud,  373;  removal  of  Gifford 
Pinchot  from  head  of  Forestry 
Bureau,  394;  stopping  of  educa 
tional  work  of  the  Forest  Service 
under,  401 ;  attitude  toward  the 
Conservation  and  other  Commis 
sions,  416;  disbandment  of  the 
Fine  Arts  Council,  420;  pardoning 
of  criminals  by,  447,  448;  acquisi 
tion  of  Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron 


Company  made  a  ground  for  dis. 
solving  the  Steel  Corporation  by. 
560  ff. 

Tammany  Hall,  57,  65,  68,  168;  al 
liance  of,  with  saloons  in  New  York 
City,  189,  190;  fight  against 
Croker  and,  in  Governorship  cam 
paign  of  1898,  272 

Target  shooting,  31-33 

Tawney,  Congressman,  369,  406 

Tawney  Amendment  to  Sundry  Civil 
bill,  416 

Taxidermy,  lessons  in,  17 

Taylor,  Admiral,  210 

Taylor,  Buck,  124 

Tenement-house  cigar  legislation,  79-81 

Tenement-house  conditions,  first-hand 
investigation  of,  199,  200 

Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Company 
case,  397,  439-443;  discussion  of 
case  when  made  a  ground  for  dis 
solving  the  Steel  Corporation,  561- 
563 

Tennis  Cabinet,  the,  45,  46,  355 

Tests,  riding  and  walking,  for  officers, 
46-49 

Thayer,  Professor  James,  54 

Third-term  views,  387-390 

Thomas,  Admiral,  550 

Thompson,  Hugh,  129 

Thrush,  the  English,  325 

Tillman,  Senator,  435,  436 

Torpedo  boats  in  world  voyage  of  bat» 
tie  fleet,  551,  552 

Tortugas  Key,  Florida,  bird  reserva 
tion  at,  422 

Trade-unionism,  201,  471-473,  478  ff. 

Trusts,  regulation  of,  and  square  deal 
to,  438  ff.,  560-573 

Turner,  Senator,  353 

Uncle  Remus,  a  forerunner  of,  12 
"Under  Two  Flags,"  story  of  reading 

of,  15 

Universal  suffrage,  161-167 
Universities,  gifts  to,  as  a  means  of 

subsidizing    heads     of    educational 

bodies,  451,  452 

Van  Duzer,  Jonas,  65 

Venezuela,  attitude  of  United  States 
toward,  506,  507;  prevention  of  oc 
cupation  of,  by  Germany,  512;  dif 
ference  between  case  of,  and  that  of 
Colombia,  531 


INDEX 


597 


Vice,  measures  to  be  taken  concerning, 

196-199 
Vice-Presidency,    nomination    to    the, 

308,  309 

Virginia,  house  in,  320 
Volunteer    unpaid    commissions,    365- 

369;   abandoned  by  President  Taft, 

369 
Votes  for  women,  161-167 

Wadsworth,  Austin,  315 

Wainwright,  Admiral,  210,  212,  550, 
556 

Walcott,  Charles  D.,  306,  393,  397 

Waldron,   Roosevelt  ancestor,   1 

Wallace,  Henry,  413 

Wall  Street,  opposition  of,  to  Spanish 
War,  209;  opposition  in  campaign 
of  1904,  386;  hostility  of,  shown  at 
time  of  Santo  Domingan  trouble, 
510.  See  also  Big  Business 

Walsh,  banker,  case  of,  373 

War,  necessity  of  preparation  for, 
204-207,  532-538 

Waring,  George  F.,  168 

Washburn,  Stanley,  biography  of  Gen 
eral  Nogi  by,  224 

Water-power,  control  of,  by  private 
interests,  418 

Water-power  policy  established  by 
Forest  Service,  406 

Watson,  Thomas,  413 

Weismann,  Henry,  202 

Welch,  Thomas,  65 

Western  Federation  of  Miners,  the 
troubles  concerning,  376,  377,  487- 
491 

Weston,  General,  226,  227 

West  Point  officers,  221 

Weyl,  Walter,  "Mew  Democracy"  by, 
25 

Wheeler,  General  Joseph,  239,  244, 
259 

Whipping,  advocated  for  men  white- 
slavers,  197 

Whisky,  on  hunting  trips,  37 

White,  Chief  Justice,  quoted,  429 

White,  Henry,  356,  357,  543 

White,  Stewart  Edward,  excellence  as 
a  shot,  31 


White  slave  traffic,  197,  374,  375 

Wichita  Game  Preserves,  421 

Widener,  Squire  Bill,  quoted,  337 

Wilcox,  Ansley,  349 

Wild  life,  measures  for  protection  of, 
420-422 

Wilgus,  Horace  L.,  paper  by,  573 

Willis,  John,   114 

Wilson,  Woodrow,  the  "New  Free 
dom"  of,  423;  pardoning  of  crimi 
nals  by,  447;  reply  to  attacks  on 
author  contained  in  the  "New 
Freedom,"  574-582 

Wind  Cave  Park,  420 

Winslow,  Cameron,  210,  331 

Wise,  Assistant  District  Attorney, 
373,  446 

Wister,  Owen,  93,  120 

\Volverton,  Judge,  360 

Woman's  suffrage,  161-167 

Wood,  J.  G.,  natural  history  books  by, 
17 

Wood,  Leonard,  41,  45,  47,  233  ff., 
247,  259,  340;  superlative  qualities 
of,  217;  appointed  Colonel  of  First 
United  States  Volunteer  Cavalry 
(Rough  Riders),  218;  gift  for  or 
ganization,  227;  wins  brigadier-gen 
eralship,  244;  letter  by,  262,  263; 
work  as  Governor  of  Cuba,  504 

Woodruff,  George,  405 

Woodruff,  Timothy  L.,  269,  284,  2&5, 
309 

Woody,  Tazewell,  114 

Wrestling  as  an  exercise,  40 

Wright,  Carroll  D.,  466,  469,  493 

Wynne,  Robert  J.,  370 

Yellowstone  Park,  visit  to,  with  John 

Burroughs,  320,  321 
Yosemite,    visit    to    the,    with    John 

Muir,  321,  322 
Young,   General   S.   B.   M.,   222,   235, 

239,  259,  522 
Young   Men's    Christian    Association, 

boxing  recommended  for,  42 
Youngs,  William  J.,  302 

Zoology,  first  steps  in,  14 


U.C.BERKELEY  LIBRARIES 


